
# Nmap

Techniques:
- nmap --help

## Host discovery
- to see which systems are online
- scan network range
	- `sudo nmap 10.129.2.0/24 -sn -oA tnet | grep for | cut -d" " -f5`
	- -sN: no port scanning
	- -oA tnet: stores results inall formats starting with the name tnet
- scan ip list
	- eg. if given a list of hosts in a file caled hosts.lst
	- `sudo nmap -sn -oA tnet -iL hosts.lst | grep for | cut -d" " -f5`
- scan multiple ips
	- `sudo nmap -sn -oA tnet 10.129.2.18 10.129.2.19 10.129.2.20| grep for | cut -d" " -f5`
	- can specify a range too
		- `sudo nmap -sn -oA tnet 10.129.2.18-20| grep for | cut -d" " -f5`
- scan single ip
	- `sudo nmap 10.129.2.18 -sn -oA host` 
	- If we disable port scan (-sn), Nmap auto ping scan with ICMP echo requests
		- usually expect icmp reply if pinging host is alive
		- can manually send icmp echo requests with `-PE`
	- `--packet-trace` to see packet traces -> see ARP pings and replies
	- `--disable-arp-ping` to disable arp pings
	- `--reason` to see reason why Nmap marked our target as 'alive'
	- can get clues to system, eg. ttl from icmp requests (-PE) show ttl, which are operating-system specific

- sometimes nmap don't recognise things. 
	- try to nc the port -> see if anything. banner grabbing
## Host and Port scanning
- 6 states:
	- Open
	- Closed (TCP protocol indicates packet received contains RST falg)
	- Filtered (no info/error code, can't determine)
	- Unfiltered (accessible but don't know if closed or open)
	- Open | Filtered (no response, firewall or packet may protect it)
	- Closed | Fitlered (Only in Ip ID idle scans, impossible to determine if closed or filtered by firewall)
- Flags
	- `-p 22, 25, ..`
	- `--top-ports = 10`
	- `-p-` : all ports
	- `-F` : top 100 ports
- Tracing packets
	- `--packet-trace`
	- `-Pn` (disable icmp echo requests)
	- `-n` (disable DNS resolution)
	- `--disable-arp-ping` (disable arp ping scan)
- Connect scan
	- `-sT` 
	- uses full 3 way handshake
	- not so secure
- Stealth scan
	- `-sC`
- Filtered ports
	- if shown as filtered, may be because of firewall
	- to track handling
		- see above. packet trace, disable icmp, dns and arp
	- if we that duration of scan is much longer, ie. its rejected slowly, may consider firewall there
- UDP ports
	- `-sU`
	- much slower
- Version scan
	- -`-sV

## Saving the results
- 3 diff types of outputs
	- `-oN` normal
	- `-oG` grepable
	- `-oX` xml
	- -`oA` ALL OF THE ABOVE

## Service detection
- Recommended to do quick port scan first, then do service scan on the specific ones
- `-sV` 
- Banner grabbing
	- Sometimes nmap misses things. Try other ways
		- tcpdump
			- `sudo tcpdump -i eth0 host 10.10.14.2`
		- nc
			- `nc -nv 1012.2.28.25`

## Nmap Scripting Engine (NSE)
Types
- default scripts
	- `-sC`
- specific scripts
	- `--script <category>`
- defined scripts
	- `--script <script-name>, <script-name>,..`

Script examples:
- --script banner,smtp-commands
- --script vuln

# Performance
- Usually, --min-RTT-timeout of 100ms
- Can increase speed at the cost of possible missed hosts with
	- --initial-rtt-timeout 50ms
	- --max-rtt-timeout 100ms
- Can change max retries to lower
	- --max-retries 0
- Can change rates
	- --min-rate 300 -> set min number of packets sent per second
- Timing
	- -T (0-5): aggressiveness. higher value is faster

# Firewall and IDS/IPS Expansion
- Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
	- Scans for attacks, analyses, reports
- Intrusion Prevention System (IPS)
	- Takes defensive measures
- How to detect if these are present?
	- Scan from a single host (VPS) - Virtual Private Server
		- If blocked, then we know. Continue with another VPS

Decoys
- -D with nmap
- Nmap generates random IP addresses inserted into the IP header
- eg.
	- `-D RND:6`
		- 6 random IP addresses
- Our real ip address inserted inside somewhere
- Spoofed packets often filterd by ISPs and routers
	- So we can specify our VPS server's IP addresses and use in combination with IP ID manipulatino oin the IP headers to scan target
- Can also manually specify source Ip address
	- `-S 10.129.2.200`
- Can be used with
	- SYN, ACK, ICMP scans, OS detection scans

# DNS Proxying
- Default, Nmap performs revese DNS resolution
	- ie. finding domain associated with IP
	- default - DNS queries over UDP port 53
	- TCP port 53 used for some
- However we can still specify DNS servers ourselves 
	- `--dns-server <ns>,<ns>
	- Useful if eg. in Demilitarized Zone
		- Company's DNS serverse more trusted than those form Internet
		- so we can use them to interact with hosts of internal network
	- Another eg.
		- use TCP port 53 as source port for scane
			- `--source-port 53`
				- if admin uses firewall to control this port and does not filter IDS/IPS properly, our TCP packets will be tusted and pass through
				- ie. pretend to send from source port 53. Firewall thinks it's a dns request, allows packets
		- `sudo nmap 10.129.2.28 -p50000 -sS -Pn -n --disable-arp-ping --packet-trace --source-port 53`

# Lab learning points
- Ask for service detection: -sV tag
- Ask for OS detection: -O tag
- Ask for DNS: -sU tag
- Evasion: set source port to 53
- Try **connecting** to the port after the nmap scan
	- Can continue to use evasion technique here
	- `nc -p <source port> <destination ip> <destination port>`
	- Then again set source port to 53 to bypass

