# Syntax
- `T* p` -> p is a pointer that points to a T
- `*p` -> dereference the pointer

```cpp
int x{6};
int* p = &x; // Pointer p of type (int *) stores address of x
*p = 8; // Go to the address stored by p, change the value to 8
```

# Pointer initialisation
```CPP
int* ptr;        // an uninitialized pointer (holds a garbage address)
int* ptr2{};     // a null pointer
int* ptr3{ &x }; // a pointer initialized with the address of variable x
```

# Pointer assignment
```cpp
int x {6};
int* p1 = &x;
*p1 = 3; //change value of x to 3
p1 = &y; //change pointer to point to something else
```

- Note: & returns a **pointer** to the operand, not a literal that stores the address or anything else
	- Can test with `#include <typeinfo>`, `typeid(&x)` 
		- Result: `int *`

# Size
- Always the same no matter what type
- Dependent on system
	- eg. 64 bit system, then 64 bit pointer

# Dangling pointer
- A pointer that holds the address of an object that is no longer valid (lifetime expired)

# Deleting pointers (if point to heap memory)
```cpp
int* p = new Obj();
free(p);
```
- `new` 
	- **Allocates memory** on the heap, which calls `malloc` under the hood
	- Constructs the object in that memory (calling **constructor**)
	- Returns a **void pointer** to the address of that object
- `delete`
	- Calls the **destructor** on the object
	- **Frees** the memory, which calls `free` under the hood
# Null pointer
```cpp
// 2 ways to initialise
int* ptr {}; // ptr is now a null pointer, and is not holding an address
int* ptr { nullptr };
```
- =/= unitialised pointer!
- `nullptr` keyword
	- Represents null pointer literal
- Dereferencing null pointer is undefined behvaiour
- Converts to boolean `false`
	- Check with `if (ptr)`
- No easy way to check for dangling pointers

> Pointer should either hold address of valid object, or be set to nullptr
> This way, can assume any non-null pointer is valid.

> When object is destroyed, any pointers to it will be left dangling. Own responsibility to set these to `nullptr`

> Favour references over pointers unless additional capabilities provided by pointers needed

# Pointer to const
- **Cannot** point a **regular** pointer to a const value
	- Because that would allow modification of it through the pointer
- Pointer to const
	- Can point to **const** AND **non-const** objects
	- Does not allow modification of the value through this pointer, even if is non-const object
```cpp
const int x{5};
const int* ptr {&x}; // ptr to const. this is allowed.

int y{4};
const int* ptr2{&y}; // allowed. CANNOT MODIFY VALUE AT THAT ADDRESS

const int z{4};
int* ptr3 {&z}; // not allowed sinze z is const.
```

# Const pointer
- **Cannot reseat pointer**
	- But can modify the pointee
```cpp
int* const ptr {&x};
ptr = &y; // not allowed
```

# Pass by address
- Pointer as a function parameter
```cpp
void printByAddress(const std::string* ptr) { 
// The function parameter is a pointer that holds the address of str
}
```

> Remember to check for null pointers in functions first! Use asserts if never should receive one.

> Prefer pass by const reference unless have a reason to use pass by address
- Former can accept rvalues too.
- More natural format, can just pass in literals or objects

## Common use cases for pass by address
- Optional arguments
	- But better to do this with function overloads
```cpp
void printIDNumber(const int *id=nullptr) {
    if (id)
        std::cout << "Your ID number is " << *id << ".\n";
    else
        std::cout << "Your ID number is not known.\n";
}
```

- Changing what pointer parameter points at
```cpp
void nullify([[maybe_unused]] int* ptr2) {
    ptr2 = nullptr; // Make the function parameter a null pointer
}
```

- Pass by address by reference?
	- But is this really necessary? We save copying 8 bytes only.
```cpp
void nullify(int*& refptr) { // refptr is now a reference to a pointer 
    refptr = nullptr; // Make the function parameter a null pointer
}
```


# Void pointer
- Can point to objects of any data type

```cpp
void* ptr {};
ptr = &nValue; // valid
ptr = &fValue; // valid
```
- But cannot dereference becaus it doesn't know what type of object it is pointing to.
	- Must first cast to another type!

```cpp
int value{ 5 };
void* voidPtr{ &value };

// std::cout << *voidPtr << '\n'; // illegal: dereference of void pointer

int* intPtr{ static_cast<int*>(voidPtr) }; // void pointer to an int pointer
```
- Deleting void pointer: undefined behaviour, again because it doesn't know what object it's pointing to.
	- Must first cast to the appropriate type first!

- Cannot do pointer arithmetic, because don't know object size