# lvalues
- lvalues
	- Represents object that has **memory address**
	- Can take its address using '&'
	- Modifiable vs non modifiable
		- Non modifiable: if **const/constexpr**
- rvalues
	- Represents value that does not have persistent memory address
	- Usually temporary, like literals or expressions
	- Exist only in the scope of the expression in which they are used

```cpp
int return5() {
    return 5;
}

int main() {
    int x{ 5 }; // 5 is an rvalue expression
    const double d{ 1.2 }; // 1.2 is an rvalue expression

    int y { x }; // x is a modifiable lvalue expression
    const double e { d }; // d is a non-modifiable lvalue expression
    int z { return5() }; // return5() is an rvalue expression 

    int w { x + 1 }; // x + 1 is an rvalue expression
    int q { static_cast<int>(d) }; // static casting result is an rvalue expression
}
```

A rule of thumb to identify lvalue and rvalue expressions:
- **Lvalue** expressions are those that **evaluate to functions or identifiable objects** (including variables) that **persist** beyond the end of the expression.
- Rvalue expressions are those that evaluate to **values**, including literals and temporary objects that **do not persist** beyond the end of the expression.

## Operators
- Operators expect operands to be rvalues
	- Hence why `5=x` is not valid. Assignment operation requires left operant to be a modifiable lvalue expression
- Conversion
	- `x=y` allowed, why?
	- The lvalue y undergoes lvalue to rvalue conversion, which evaluates y to produce rvalue (2)
	- **lvalue -> rvalue implicit conversion** (but not the other way round)

# lvalue references
```cpp
int x {6};
int& ref {x}; // lvalue reference to x
```

- Binds to the lvalue  
	- A **non-const** lvalue reference **cannot** bind to a **const** variable

- Once a lvalue reference is bound to a variable, it cannot be rebound to another variable. 
	- **Unlike pointer, cannot reseat a reference**
```CPP
int a = 5;
int b = 10;

int &ref = a;
ref = b; //This does not change the reference to that of b! Instead changes the value of a to 10.
```

- Scoping and duration
	- Same rules as  normal variables.
- Lifetimes
	- Save for one exception, lifetime of reference and referent are independent.
		- Reference can be destroyed before the object it is referencing (nothing wrong)
		- Object being referenced can be destroyed before reference -> **dangling reference**
## Pass by (normal) lvalue reference
```CPP
void addOne(int& y) { //y is bound to the actual object x
	++y; //modifies the actual object x
}
addOne(x);
```
- No need for expensive copies.
- Address of y is the same as address of x.
- Take note that non-const lvalue references can only take in **modifiable** lvalues (see above)
	- **Cannot** take in const values
	- **Cannot** bind to **temporary** objects by passing in literals

# lvalue reference to const
- Can bind to
	- **const** lvalue
	- **non-const** lvalue
	- **rvalues**
-  If bound to **temporary objects**, it **extends the lifetime of the object to match the reference**
	- Note: this only works when bound to a **temporary**. 
	- See example below. Temp object initialised with rvalue of 5, then lifetime will match that of ref3.

```cpp
const int x {5};
const int& ref {x}; //ok

int y {6};
const int& ref2 {y}; //also ok! canonot modify y through ref2, but changes to y will be reflected in ref.

const int& ref3 {5}; //ok, can bind to temporary objects. But cannot do this with non-const ref.
// This last example is example of binding to rvalue, ie. a temporary. Lifetime is extended to match that of ref3.
```

- Temporaries returned from **function** are **NOT** eligible for lifetime extension!!
```cpp
const std::string& f() {  
	return std::string("hello");  
} // this will still result in dangling reference.
```
- Just remember: objects **created** **inside** **function** **do not survive** unless returned by **value**

## constexpr reference to const variable
- Note that `const` applies to the object being referenced, not the reference itself.
- So if we want this to be constexpr, we need to specify **both**
- `constexpr const int&`
	- `constexpr` refers to the reference
	- `const` refers to the type being referenced
## Different types
- lvalue ref to const can bind to values of diff type, as long as can implicitly convert those values to reference type
	- Compiler creates **temporary** object of same type as reference, initialise it with value, then **bind** reference to the **temporary**
	- Take note of this key difference! This bind to the temporary means that **changing c will not be reflected in the ref since temporary object doesnt change**
```CPP
char c { 'a' };
const int& r2 { c };     // temporary int initialized with value 'a', r2 binds to temporary

std::cout << r2 << '\n'; // prints 97 (since r2 is a reference to int)
```

## Pass by lvalue reference to const
```CPP
void printRef(const int& y) { // y is a reference to const
    std::cout << y << '\n';
}

printRef(z);
```
- Unlike normal lvalue references, **can** take in const lvalue or rvalue literals (binds to temporary object)
- Cannot modify the value being referenced through this reference

> Favour passing by **reference to const** unless have specific reason to do so otherwise (eg. function needs to change argument value)

- Different types
	- See above. 
	
> Ensure type of argument matches type of reference, or will result in conversion

> Pass fundamental types by value, class types by const reference.

# Return by reference
```cpp
const std::string& getProgramName() {
    static const std::string s_programName { "Calculator" }; 
    // has static duration, destroyed at end of program

    return s_programName;
}
```
##  When is it okay to return by reference?
- Returning a reference to a **reference parameter** (object lives outside function)
	- Including when the reference parameter is a **const reference** that binds to the **rvalue argument** passed in (see example below)
- Returning a reference to a **member** variable (member variable lives as long as object lives)
- Returning reference to a **static/global** object (lifetime is the entire program)
- Returning from **containers** (safe as long as vector is still alive)
```cpp
const std::string& foo(const std::string& s) {
	return s;
}

const std::string s2{foo(std::string("Temporary String"))}
```
- This is ok because the temporary string created, which s bound to, still exists until the end of this expression!
	- So s returned is a reference to this same temporary string that still exists
	- Since s is a const ref, the lifetime of the temporary string is extended.
	- Then this is used to copy construct s2.
	- But still remember that lifetime extension doesn't apply to return values from functions. In this case, the lifetime extension is already applied, then the parameter is returned.
- **KIV this- not sure!**
## DON'T return these from reference:
- Anything locally created within the function
	- Will result in dangling reference since the object will be destroyed when the function returns
- **Non-const static** local variables
	- Because if 2 const references bind to this, will end up with same values (since they point to the same static variable)
```cpp
const int& getNextId() {
    static int s_x{ 0 }; // note: variable is non-const
    ++s_x; // generate the next id
    return s_x; // and return a reference to it
}
```

# Other notes
- Assigning/initialising a normal variable with a returned reference makes a **copy**
```CPP
const int id1 { getNextId() }; // where getNextId() returns const int& -> copy made!
const int id2 { getNextId() };
```
- The 2 variables above are normal variables, not references, so they take a **copy** of `s_x` (and thus will get different values)
