# Type categories
- Expressions have types.
- eg.
	- Type of "foo" is string literal
- Type of expression must be determinable at compile time, though value may be determined at runtime (if expression is not constexpr)
# Value categories: lvalues and rvalues
- lvalues
	- Represents object that has **memory address**
	- Can take its address using '&'
	- Modifiable vs non modifiable
		- Non modifiable: if **const/constexpr**
- rvalues
	- Represents value that does not have persistent memory address
	- Usually temporary, like literals or expressions
	- Exist only in the scope of the expression in which they are used

Examples
```cpp
int return5()
{
    return 5;
}

int main()
{
    int x{ 5 }; // 5 is an rvalue expression
    const double d{ 1.2 }; // 1.2 is an rvalue expression

    int y { x }; // x is a modifiable lvalue expression
    const double e { d }; // d is a non-modifiable lvalue expression
    int z { return5() }; // return5() is an rvalue expression (since the result is returned by value)

    int w { x + 1 }; // x + 1 is an rvalue expression
    int q { static_cast<int>(d) }; // the result of static casting d to an int is an rvalue expression

    return 0;
}
```

A rule of thumb to identify lvalue and rvalue expressions:
- **Lvalue** expressions are those that **evaluate to functions or identifiable objects** (including variables) that **persist** beyond the end of the expression.
- Rvalue expressions are those that evaluate to **values**, including literals and temporary objects that **do not persist** beyond the end of the expression.
## Operators
- Operators expect operands to be rvalues
	- Hence why `5=x` is not valid. Assignment operation requires left operant to be a modifiable lvalue expression
- Conversion
	- `x=y` allowed, why?
	- The lvalue y undergoes lvalue to rvalue conversion, which evaluates y to produce rvalue (2)
	- **lvalue -> rvalue implicit conversion** (but not the other way round)

# lvalue references
```CPP
int x {6};
int& ref {x};
```

- Binds to the lvalue 
- & does **not** mean address off, it means **lvalue reference to**
- Can be const or non-const
	- Depending on what they bind to
	- Only const references can bind to const lvalues
- Once a lvalue reference is bound to a variable, it cannot be rebound to another variable. Can treat it like an alias.
```CPP
int a = 5;
int b = 10;

int &ref = a;
ref = b; //This does not change the reference to that of b! Instead changes the value of a to 10.
```

- Scoping and duration
	- Same rules as  normal variables.
- Lifetimes
	- Save for one exception, lifetime of reference and referent are independent.
		- Reference can be destroyed before the object it is referencing (nothing wrong)
		- Object being referenced can be destroyed before reference -> **dangling reference**
## Pass by (normal) lvalue reference
```CPP
void addOne(int& y) { //y is bound to the actual object x
	++y; //modifies the actual object x
}
addOne(x);
```
- No need for expensive copies.
- Address of y is the same as address of x.
- Take note that non-const lvalue references can only take in **modifiable** lvalues (see above)
	- Cannot take in const values
	- Cannot bind to temporary objects by passing in literals

# lvalue references to const
- Can bind to const or non-const objects.
	- See examples below
- Normal lvalue references can only bind to modifiable lvalues
- lvalue references to const can bind to modifiable lvalues, non-modifiable lvalues, rvalues.

- If bound to **temporary objects**, it **extends the lifetime of the object to match the reference**
	- Note: this only works when bound to a **temporary**. 
	- Temporaries returned from **function** are **NOT** eligible for lifetime extension!!
	- See example below. Temp object initialised with rvalue of 5, then lifetime will match that of ref3.
```CPP
const int x {5};
const int& ref {x}; //ok

int y {6};
const int& ref2 {y}; //also ok! canonot modify y through ref2, but changes to y will be reflected in ref.

const int& ref3 {5}; //ok, can bind to temporary objects. But cannot do this with non-const ref.
// This last example is example of binding to rvalue, ie. a temporary. Lifetime is extended to match that of ref3.
```

### constexpr reference to const variable
- Note that `const` applies to the object being referenced, not the reference itself.
- So if we want this to be constexpr, we need to specify **both**
- `constexpr const int&`
	- `constexpr` refers to the reference
	- `const` refers to the type being referenced
### Different types
- lvalue ref to const can bind to values of diff type, as long as can implicitly convert those values to reference type
	- Compiler creates **temporary** object of same type as reference, initialise it with value, then **bind** reference to the **temporary**
	- Take note of this key difference! This bind to the temporary means that **changing c will not be reflected in the ref since temporary object doesnt change**
```CPP
char c { 'a' };
const int& r2 { c };     // temporary int initialized with value 'a', r2 binds to temporary

std::cout << r2 << '\n'; // prints 97 (since r2 is a reference to int)
```

## Pass by lvalue reference to const
```CPP
void printRef(const int& y) // y is a reference to const
{
    std::cout << y << '\n';
}

printRef(z);
```
- Unlike normal lvalue references, **can** take in const lvalue or rvalue literals (binds to temporary object)
- Cannot modify the value being referenced through this reference

> Favour passing by reference to const unless have specific reason to do so otherwise (eg. function needs to change argument value)

- Different types
	- See above. 
> Ensure type of argument matches type of reference, or will result in conversion

> Pass fundamental types by value, class types y const reference.


### Aside: performance cost
- Pass by value
	- Cost of initialising function parameter: making a copy.
		- Proportional to size of object, and additional setup costs (some classes do other things like opening file/database, allocating dynamic memory etc.)
	- Cost of using function parameter
		- Program can directly access storage location (CPU register/RAM)
- Pass by reference
	- Cost of initialising function parameter: always fast
	- Cost of using function parameter
		- One more step, cos must first access storage location allocated to the reference, then access storage location of the referenced object (so total one more CPU register/RAM access)

What is cheap to copy?
- Generally, if `sizeof(T) <= 2 * sizeof(void*)`
```CPP
#define isSmall(T) (sizeof(T) <= 2 * sizeof(void*))
- use preprocessor function-like macro, so we can provide either an object or a type name as parameter (regular C++ functions disallow passing types as parameter)
```

## Why std::string_view parameters better than const std::string&
- Because std::string_view can bind so std::string/std::string_view/C-syle string, all with inexpensive copy/conversion
- In contract, const std::string &
	- Will bind to std::string, OK
	- Will need to explicitly cast std::string_view to std::string, INEFFICIENT
	- Will convert C-style string/literal to std::string, INEFFICIENT

# Return by reference
```cpp
const std::string& getProgramName() // returns a const reference
{
    static const std::string s_programName { "Calculator" }; // has static duration, destroyed at end of program

    return s_programName;
}
```

> But must be sure that the object returned by the reference lives beyond the scope of the function. Eg. in above, is made **static**
> 4 cases: static, reference refers to object passed into function, reference refers to global object, reference refers to object stored inside another object that outlives call

- Lifetime extension doesn't work across function boundaries
```cpp
const int& returnByConstReference(){
    return 5; // returns const reference to temporary object
}

int main(){
    const int& ref { returnByConstReference() };
    std::cout << ref; // undefined behavior
    return 0;
}

// Example 2:
const int& returnByConstReference(const int& ref){
    return ref;
}

int main(){
    const int& ref2 { returnByConstReference(5) }; // binds to dangling reference
    std::cout << ref2 << '\n'; // undefined behavior
    return 0;
}
```

## Don't return non-const static local variables by reference
eg.
```cpp
const int& getNextId()
{
    static int s_x{ 0 }; // note: variable is non-const
    ++s_x; // generate the next id
    return s_x; // and return a reference to it
}
```
- Because if 2 const references bind to this, will end up with same values (since they point to the same static variable)

## Assigning/initialising normal variable with a returned reference **MAKES A COPY**
- eg. following the above example
```CPP
const int id1 {getNextId()};
const int id2 { getNextId() };
```
- The 2 variables above are normal variables, not references, so they take a copy of `s_x` (and thus will get different values)

## Can return reference parameters by reference
```CPP
const std::string& firstAlphabetical(const std::string& a, const std::string& b)
{
	return (a < b) ? a : b; // We can use operator< on std::string to determine which comes first alphabetically
}
```

## Can return by const reference an rvalue that is passed by const reference
```CPP
const std::string& foo(const std::string& s) {
	return s;
}

const std::string s2{foo(std::string("Temporary String"))}
```
- This is ok because the temporary string created, which s bound to, still exists until the end of this expression!
	- So s returned is a reference to this same temporary string that still exists
	- Since s is a const ref, the lifetime of the temporary string is extended.
	- Then this is used to copy construct s2.