# Type categories
- Expressions have types.
- eg.
	- Type of "foo" is string literal
- Type of expression must be determinable at compile time, though value may be determined at runtime (if expression is not constexpr)
# Value categories: lvalues and rvalues
- lvalues
	- Represents object that has **memory address**
	- Can take its address using '&'
	- Modifiable vs non modifiable
		- Non modifiable: if **const/constexpr**
- rvalues
	- Represents value that does not have persistent memory address
	- Usually temporary, like literals or expressions
	- Exist only in the scope of the expression in which they are used

Examples
```cpp
int return5()
{
    return 5;
}

int main()
{
    int x{ 5 }; // 5 is an rvalue expression
    const double d{ 1.2 }; // 1.2 is an rvalue expression

    int y { x }; // x is a modifiable lvalue expression
    const double e { d }; // d is a non-modifiable lvalue expression
    int z { return5() }; // return5() is an rvalue expression (since the result is returned by value)

    int w { x + 1 }; // x + 1 is an rvalue expression
    int q { static_cast<int>(d) }; // the result of static casting d to an int is an rvalue expression

    return 0;
}
```

A rule of thumb to identify lvalue and rvalue expressions:
- **Lvalue** expressions are those that **evaluate to functions or identifiable objects** (including variables) that **persist** beyond the end of the expression.
- Rvalue expressions are those that evaluate to **values**, including literals and temporary objects that **do not persist** beyond the end of the expression.
## Operators
- Operators expect operands to be rvalues
	- Hence why `5=x` is not valid. Assignment operation requires left operant to be a modifiable lvalue expression
- Conversion
	- `x=y` allowed, why?
	- The lvalue y undergoes lvalue to rvalue conversion, which evaluates y to produce rvalue (2)
	- **lvalue -> rvalue implicit conversion** (but not the other way round)

# lvalue references
```CPP
int x {6};
int& ref {x};
```

- Binds to the lvalue 
- & does **not** mean address off, it means **lvalue reference to**
- Can be const or non-const
	- Depending on what they bind to
	- Only const references can bind to const lvalues
- Once a lvalue reference is bound to a variable, it cannot be rebound to another variable. Can treat it like an alias.
```CPP
int a = 5;
int b = 10;

int &ref = a;
ref = b; //This does not change the reference to that of b! Instead changes the value of a to 10.
```

- Scoping and duration
	- Same rules as  normal variables.
- Lifetimes
	- Save for one exception, lifetime of reference and referent are independent.
		- Reference can be destroyed before the object it is referencing (nothing wrong)
		- Object being referenced can be destroyed before reference -> **dangling reference**

## Const lvalue references
- Can bind to const or non-const objects.
	- See examples below
> Prefer const reference (by const reference i mean "lvalue referene to const", ie not allowed to modify the object through this reference)

- If bound to **temporary objects**, it **extends the lifetime of the object to match the reference**
	- See example below. Temp object initialised with rvalue of 5, then lifetime will match that of ref3.
```CPP
const int x {5};
const int& ref {x}; //ok

int y {6};
const int& ref2 {y}; //also ok! canonot modify y through ref2

const int& ref3 {5}; //ok, can bind to temporary objects. But cannot do this with non-const ref.
```

### Different types
- 