```CPP
int x{6};
int* p = &x; // Pointer p of type (int *) stores address of x
*p = 8; // Go to the address stored by p, change the value to 8
```

Side note: when declaring multiple variables on single line (should avoid anyway), the `*` needs to be attached to each variable
`int* ptr3, * ptr4;`

## Initialisation
```CPP
int* ptr;        // an uninitialized pointer (holds a garbage address)
int* ptr2{};     // a null pointer
int* ptr3{ &x }; // a pointer initialized with the address of variable x
```
> Always intialise pointers

- Type must match variable (exactly)

## Assignment
```CPP
int x {6};
int* p1 = &x;
*p1 = 3; //change value of x to 3
p1 = &y; //change pointer to point to something else
```

- Note: & returns a **pointer** to the operand, not a literal that stores the address or anything else
	- Can test with `#include <typeinfo>`, `typeid(&x)` 
		- Result: `int *`

## Size
- Size of pointer is always the same no matter type
- Dependent on system.
	- If 64 bit, then 64 bit pointer (8 bytes)

## Dangling pointer
- Pointer that holds address of object that is no longer valid

# Null pointer
```cpp
int* ptr {}; // ptr is now a null pointer, and is not holding an address
int* ptr { nullptr };
```

- NOT the same as unitialised pointer!
> If not initialising pointer with address of valid object, value initialise it to null pointer

- The `nullptr` keyword represents null pointer literal
	- eg. `ptr2 = nullptr;`
	- `someFunction(nullptr)`
- Dereferencing null pointer is undefined behaviour
- Null pointer converts to boolean `false`
	- So can check with `if (ptr)`
	- Use this check to ensure that you are not dereferencing a null pointer
- No easy way to check for dangling pointers
	- Just ensure in program that any pointer not pointing at valid object is set to `nullptr`

> Pointer should either hold address of valid object, or be set to nullptr
> This way, can assume any non-null pointer is valid.

> When object is destroyed, any pointers to it will be left dangling. Own responsibility to set these to `nullptr`

> Favour references over pointesr unless additional capabilities provided by pointers needed

# Pointers and const
- Cannot point regular pointer to a const value
	- Because that would allow modification of it through the value
## Pointer to const
```CPP
const int x{5};
const int* ptr {&x}; // ptr to const. this is allowed.

int y{4};
const int* ptr2{&y}; // allowed. CANNOT MODIFY VALUE AT THAT ADDRESS

const int z{4};
int* ptr3{&z}; // not allowed
```
- Pointer to const can point to non-const variables too.
	- If so, the pointer to const will not be allowed to modify the value at that addresss.
## Const pointer (pointer itself is const)
```CPP
int x{5};
int* const ptr {&x};
```
- Can't reassign the address stored by ptr, but can change the value stored at that address

> Can combine both of the above.

# Pass by address
```cpp
void printByAddress(const std::string* ptr) // The function parameter is a pointer that holds the address of str
{..}
```
> Prefer pointer to const functions (const int* param)
> Don't make function param const pointers unless have specific reason (int* const param)

> Remember to check for null pointers in functions first! Use asserts if never should receive one.

> Prefer pass by const reference unless have a reason to use pass by address
- Former can accept rvalues too.
- More natural format, can just pass in literals or objects\

## Common use cases for pass by address
- Optional arguments
	- But better to do this with function overloads
```cpp
void printIDNumber(const int *id=nullptr) {
    if (id)
        std::cout << "Your ID number is " << *id << ".\n";
    else
        std::cout << "Your ID number is not known.\n";
}
```

- Changing what pointer parameter points at
```cpp
void nullify([[maybe_unused]] int* ptr2) {
    ptr2 = nullptr; // Make the function parameter a null pointer
}
```

- Pass by address by reference?
	- But is this really necessary? We save copying 8 bytes only.
```cpp
void nullify(int*& refptr) { // refptr is now a reference to a pointer 
    refptr = nullptr; // Make the function parameter a null pointer
}
```

