Problems with structs
- Cannot document and enforce class invariants
	- Class invariants: condition that must be true throughout lifetime of object in order for object to remain in valid state

# Diff between struct and class
- Default **access**
	- struct: members **public** by default
	- class: members **private** by defualt
- Default **inheritance**
	- struct: **public** inheritance
	- class: **private** inheritance
- Everything else the same!
	- But **structs** should **avoid defining constructor** member functions as doing so makes them non-aggregae
```cpp
class Employee{
public:  // Access specifier
    int m_id {}; // m_ prefixes
    int m_age {};
    double m_wage {};
};
```

# Member variables
- Parentheses disallowed in member default initialisers due to most vexing parse
```cpp
class A {
	int x = 5; // ok
	int x(5); // compile error, not ok. is this functino declaration?
	int x{5}; // ok.
}
```
# Member functions
- Within the class
- Call with `joe.someFunction();`
- Can be overloaded
- If member only has functions and no data, consider using **namespace**
- Ordering
	- Inside class definition, can access member variables and functions before they are declared
	- HOWEVER, data members are initialised in order of declaration
		- So order might matter if there's dependencies of members

# Const class objects 
```cpp
const Date today { 2020, 10, 14 }; // const class type object
```
- Cannot modify data members of const object
	- `today.list +=1 ;` NO!
	- `today.incrementDay();` NO!
		- Cannot call member function that modifies member of const object
		- In fact, cannot call **any non-const member function**

# Const members
- Would need to be instantiated with constructor's member initialiser list
	- eg. `m_id{id}` inside the constructor initialiser list (not constructor body!!)
	- Copy initialising won't work since it's const
- Important: If class has const member, **copy assignment is deleted automatically**
	- Because that const variable can't be reassigned.
	- `Foo a; Foo b{a};` ok
	- `b=a;` not ok



# Const member functions
- Must make function a const member function to call it from a const object
```cpp
void print() const {// now a const member functio{
    std::cout << year << '/' << month << '/' << day;
}
```
- Cannot
	- Modify implicit object (change data members)
	- Call non-const member functions
- Can
	- Modify **other** objects that arent the implicit object
	- Call **const** member functions
	- Call non-member functions
	- Be called on a  **non-const** object

- For const member functions defined **outside** class definition
	- `const` keyword must be used on both function declaration in cclass definition, and on function definition outside class definition
- Constructors cannot be const (need ot initialise members of object which requires modifying them)

> If member function does not and will never modify state of object, make it const so it can be called on both const and non-const objects

- Can overload const and non-const version of functions.
	- Rare. Done when return value needs to differ in constness
## Const objects via pass by const reference
```CPP
void doSomething(const Date& date) {
	date.print(); //where print() is non-const
}
```
- Not allowed!
	- `date` is treated as conste object since passed by const reference
	- So we're not allowed to call **non-const** members here either.

# Constexpr
- Class
	- Class can be used in compile-time constant expressions if (all of the below)
		- All non-static data members are literal types, no heap-allocated members (eg. std::string, etc. allowed)
		- Constexpr constructor that can initialize all members, and only perform operations that are constant expression evaluable
		- Destructor must be trivial or constexpr
		- No runtime only operations
- Member 
	- To make constexpr, must be literal types, no heap allocation, no std::string, std::vector, dynamically allocated objects..
- Member function
	- Function must be evaluatable at compile time. Only uses literal types, arithmetics, comparisons, conditional expressions, calls to other constexpr functions etc.
	- The object it is called upon must also exist at compile time -> must have constexpr constructor

# Access specifiers
3 Types: public, private, protected
- Members of struct are public by default. Public members can be accessed by other members of class type and public
- Members of class private by default. Can only be accessed by other members of same class.

> Name private variables with "m_" prefix

```cpp
class Date {
// Any members defined here would default to private
public: // here's our public access specifier
    void print() const { // public due to above public: specifier
        // members can access other private members
        std::cout << m_year << '/' << m_month << '/' << m_day;
    }

private: // here's our private access specifier
    int m_year { 2020 };  // private due to above private: specifier
    int m_month { 14 }; // private due to above private: specifier
    int m_day { 10 };   // private due to above private: specifier
};
```

| Access level | Access specifier | Member access | Derived class access | Public access |
| ------------ | ---------------- | ------------- | -------------------- | ------------- |
| Public       | public:          | yes           | yes                  | yes           |
| Protected    | protected:       | yes           | yes                  | no            |
| Private      | private:         | yes           | no                   | no            |
> Classes should generally make member variables private/protected and member functions public
> Structs should generally avoid using access specifiers (all members default to public)

- Remember that access specifiers are per-class, **not per-object** 
	- **Private** member of object A of class X **can** be accessed by object B of class X.

# Access functions
- Getters and setters (recall 2030)
- Getters should return by value or by const lvalue reference
- Prefer implenting behaviours or acctions instead of accessing functions. 
	- eg. instead of `setAlive(bool)` setter, implement `kill()` and `revive()`

## Returning reference
- Returning const lvalue reference to data member
	- `const std::string& getName() const { return m_name; }`
	- OK to return by const lvalue reference, since the implicit object will still exist in the scope of the caller after the function runs.
		- BUT BE CAREFUL! Must also consider when the object is destroyed, especially if it is an **rvalue object**
```cpp
class Employee{
//...
	const std::string& getName() const { return m_name; } //  getter returns by const reference
}

const std::string& ref { createEmployee("Garbo").getName() }; // not ok. reference becomes dangling when return 
std::string val { createEmployee("Hans").getName() }; // ok. makes copy of referenced member
```
`createEmployee("Garbo")` is rvalue object, is destroyed after expression. The reference to the member of this rvalue object is left dangling.
- However, we can still initialise with rvalue of the same type (via copy)


- Return type of member function returning reference to data member should match data member's type
	- Eg. Prefer to return `const std::string&` rather than `std::string_view`, to avoid unnecessary conversions
- For getters
	- Consider using `auto` to ensure no conversions

- Do not return non-const references to private data members
- Const member functions not allowed to return non-const references to data members
	- Since it might allow caller to modify the member

# OOP - Encapsulation
- Prefer non-member functions to member functions

# Order of class member declaration
- Benefits of encapsulation
	- Classes easier to use
	- Maintain invariants
	- Detect and handle errors better
	- Change implementation details without breaking existing programs
> Public members, protected members, then private members

Google C++ guide:
```
Types and type aliases (typedef, using, enum, nested structs and classes, and friend types)
Static constants
Factory functions
Constructors and assignment operators
Destructor
All other functions (static and non-static member functions, and friend functions)
Data members (static and non-static)
```

# Constructors
- If class has private member variables, class type is no longer aggregate
	- Cannot use aggregate initialisation, eg. `Foo foo {6,7};`
- Note that constructor does not create object
	- Compiler sets up memory allocation for object prior to constructor call
	- Constructor then called on uninitialised object
- Syntax
	- Same name as class
		- For template classes, **exclude template parameters**
	- No return type, not even void
- Now, can do `Foo foo {6,7}`

- Implicit conversion of arguments
	- Same as regular functions.
```CPP
class Foo{
public:
    Foo(int x, int y) {
    }
};
foo {'a', true}; //ok. implicit conversion.
```

- Constructors should not be const
	- Normally, non-const member function can't be invoked on a **const object**, but the exception is constructor.
	- `const SomeObject s{};`

## Default constructors
- If has a default constructor, both value initialization and default initialization will call the default constructor
- Can have default arguments to the right. If **all** default arguments provided, then it becomes a default constructor since no need parameters to arguments.
- Only one default constructor allowed

- If no user defined constructors, **implicit** default constructor generated.
	- `Foo() {};` // Does not initialise any member.
	- We can ask the compiler to do this explicitly, especially in the case where we have other user-declared constructor
		- `Foo() = default; `// generates an explicitly defaulted default constructor

### Subtle differences in above
- Scenario 1:  When **value initialising** a class (ie with `{}`
	- **Implicit** default constructor (if no constructor, or use `=default`) will **zero initialise the object first** before default initialisation. If there's a user-defined constructor, there is no zero-initialisation, only default initialisation.
		- By default-initialisation, we mean call the constructor, which in this case does nothing.
			- Zero-initialisation means all bits set to 0 first.
```cpp
class User{
	int m_a;
	//<constructor>
}
// If constructor is `User() {}` -> user defined,
// Object is default initialised. m_a is left unitialised, thus garbage values.

// If constructor is 'User() =  default' or missing -> implicit.
// Object is **zero initialised first** before being default initialised. Thus m_ a is 0.
```
- Scenario 2:
	- Pre C++20, class with **user-defined default** constructor (even with no body) makes the class **non-aggregate** while an **explicitly defaulted** constructor does not.
		- In C++20, this inconsistency addressed. Both make class non-aggregate

*Note on zero initialisation:*
Zero-initialisation happens when:
- Object has static storage duration
- Value-initialisation of a class without a user-provided constructor
- Value-initialisation of built-ins or arrays
- As part of initialising subobjects during value-initialisation
## Using constructors
```cpp
Foo{2,5} // direct list initialisation. prevents narrowing conversion
Foo(2,5) // watch out!

// If class has constructor that takes std::initializer_list, {} prefers.
vector<int> v {1,2,3,4,5}; // calls initializer_list constructor
vector<int<> v2 (3,5) // calls constructor for 3 elements, all of value 5

Foo{} // ok.
Foo() // Will get mistaken for function declaration!
```

## Member initialiser list
- =/= initializer list, for **aggregate** initialisation
```cpp
Foo (int x, int y) : m_x {x}, m_y {y} { // m_x and m_y initialised
	//other stuff
}
```
- Member intialisation order
	- Members initalised in order of **definition in class**, not in order of member intialiser list
> Best practice: make the member initialisation list order the same as that of order of members in class definition, to prevent bugs

- Member initialisations
	- If a member is listed in the **member initializer list**, that initialization value is used
	- **Otherwise**, if the member has a **default member initializer**, that initialization value is used
	- Otherwise, the member is **default**-initialized. (for fundamental types this is left **uninitialised**)

- Note that initialisation is done via the member initialiser list, not the constructor body
	- If we do `m_x = x;` in the body, this is actually assignment not initialisation, and might give problems when we try to initialise const variables.
### Summary on initialisations
- **Default** initialisation -> nothing used
	- No initialiser provided
	- **Built in** types: **uninitialised**. Garbage if local, 0 if static/global
	- **Class** type with ctor: calls **default constructor** if present
	- **Aggregate** type: members **default-initialised** (see below)
```cpp
int x;         // default-initialized -> indeterminate (garbage)
static int y;  // default-initialized -> 0

struct Point { int x; int y; };
Point p;       // default-initialized -> x and y are indeterminate
```

- **Direct** intialisation: constructor called with (...) 
	- **Built in** types: assigns value
	- **Class type**: Calls constructor directly with provided arguments

- **List initialistion**: {...}
	- **Built in** types: assigns value
	- **Class type**: Calls constructor directly with provided arguments
	- `{}`- Direct list initialisation, prevents narrowing conversions
	- Works for aggregate types
	- Can call initializer_list constructors

- **Value** initialisation: special case with **no arguments**
	- {} or ()
		- () can only be used in expression or assignment, but not as a direct local declaration like `T x();` as it wil be treated as function definition
	- **Built in** types: set to 0
	- **Class** type with default ctor: calls **default constructor**
		- Note important special case for default implicit vs user-defined constructor
	- **Aggregate** type: All members **value-initialised** recursively
```cpp
int a{};        // value-initialized -> 0
Point p{};      // x=0, y=0
std::vector<int> v{}; // empty vector
```

- **Copy** initialisation
	- **Implicit conversions** use this
		- Temporary object on RHS constructed, then **copied** into target object on the left.
	- Explicit constructors not allowed
	- Conceptually, temporary object created on RHS, then copy constructor called to initialise the LHS. However, due to **eliding**, in case like the first one below, copy constructor is not called.
	- `Foo f3 = 3;` 
	- `Foo f3 = {6};` 
	- `Foo f7 = f3;` // Uses Foo(const Foo&), ie copy constructor
	- `Foo f7 = {f3};` 

- **Aggregate initialisation**
	- Arrays, structs, classes with public members, no constructors
	- Member-wise initialisation
	- **Partial list**: remaining members **zero-initialised**
```cpp
int arr[3] = {1, 2, 3};
```

- Constructor that accepts **std::initializer_list**
	- If ambiguous between this and another normal constructor with same number of params, using `{}` will prefer this.
```cpp
class MyCollection {
	MyCollection(std::initializer_list<int> list) {  
		for (auto elem : list) {  
		data.push_back(elem);  
		}  
	}
}
myCollection c {1,2,3,4,5,6,7};	
```

> Since value initialisation with {} is safer for aggregates, call everything with {} instead of default (no {}), because itmight be hard to tell when class type is aggregate or non-aggregate

```
Initialisation
├─ Default            : T x;              // garbage / default ctor
├─ Value              : T x{};            // zero / default ctor
├─ Direct             : T x(y);           // ctor / conversion, narrowing allowed
├─ Copy               : T x = y;          // ctor / conversion, implicit
├─ List (Brace)       : T x{y};           // ctor / conversion, narrowing prohibited
├─ Aggregate          : T x{a,b,c};       // member-wise, zero for missing
├─ Reference          : T& r = obj;       // must bind to object
└─ Temporary object   : T(y) / T{y}       // lifetime till end of expression
```

Summary
```cpp
struct Point { int x; int y; };
class MyClass {
public:
    MyClass() { /* default ctor */ }
    MyClass(int a, int b) { /* param ctor */ }
};

int main() {
    int a;        // default-initialized -> garbage
    int b{};      // value-initialized -> 0

    Point p1;     // default-initialized -> x,y garbage
    Point p2{};   // value-initialized -> x=0, y=0
    Point p3{1,2};// direct list-init -> x=1, y=2

    MyClass m1;   // default-initialized -> default ctor
    MyClass m2{}; // value-initialized -> default ctor
    MyClass m3(1,2); // direct-initialized -> param ctor
    MyClass m4{1,2}; // direct list-init -> param ctor
    
    vector c{1,2,3,4,5}; // std::intiialiser_list constructor
}
```

## Failed construction
> Best thing to do: throw exception. Discussed later on
- If not, we can also have a private constructor, and havve a public `createObject()` function that calls the constructor, which returns a `std::optional<>`
```CPP
#include <iostream>
#include <optional>

class Fraction {
private:
    int m_numerator { 0 };
    int m_denominator { 1 };

    // private constructor can't be called by public
    Fraction(int numerator, int denominator):
        m_numerator { numerator }, m_denominator { denominator } {
    }

public:
    // Allow this function to access private members
    friend std::optional<Fraction> createFraction(int numerator, int denominator);
};

std::optional<Fraction> createFraction(int numerator, int denominator) {
    if (denominator == 0)
        return {};
    return Fraction{numerator, denominator};
}

int main() {
    auto f1 { createFraction(0, 1) };
    if (f1)
    {
        std::cout << "Fraction created\n";
    }

    auto f2 { createFraction(0, 0) };
    if (!f2)
    {
        std::cout << "Bad fraction\n";
    }
}
```

#### Quiz example, and considerations
```cpp
#include <string>
#include <iostream>

class Ball {
public:
    Ball(std::string_view color, double radius) : m_color{color}, m_radius{radius}{
    }

    const std::string& getColor() const {
        return m_color;
    }
    double getRadius() const {
        return m_radius;
    }
private:
    std::string m_color{"none"};
    double m_radius{0.0};

};

void print(const Ball& ball) {
    std::cout << "Ball(" << ball.getColor() << ", " << ball.getRadius() << ")\n";
}

int main () {
    const Ball blue {"blue", 10.0};
    print(blue);
}
```
1. Class member parameter accessibility and types
- color should be std::string because we want to own the string.
- both should be made private and accessed through getters.
- if we might want to change these values in the future, don't make them const.

2. Constructor parameters
- color is a std::string, but doesn't mean we can't pass in a string_view so we cut down on 1 copying.

3. Getter function modifiers
- getColor - return string? stringview? const string&?
	- string is expensive to copy, but safe.
	- string__view is ok, but we have to watch object lifetime. eg.
		- `std::string_view bad = Ball{"red", 5}.getColor();`// this is dangling!
		- Unnamed ball object is destroyed after this line returns, so m_color is destroyed too. sv points to invalid memory
		- But if we only use it with named objects, this is always safe since the named object will clearly still be valid.
	- const string&
		- This is safer. Recall that **if a temporary object is bound to const reference, its lifetime is extended to match the reference**.
			- `const std::string& colorRef = Ball{"red", 5}.getColor();`
			- This is ok! The lifetime of (unnamedball).m_color is extended to match reference of the const string&.
- const function? (const after function name)
	- Since both functions don't modify the member variables, they should be made const so we can call from a const object (which we do).
- constexpr member function?
	- for this to be evaluated at compile time, the **object** needs to be available at compile time.
	- this means **all members** of the object must be evaluated at compile time.
	- here, std::string cannot be evaluated at compile time as it requires memory allocation. hence ball object cannot exist at compile time, so no function can be constexpr

4. Created object
- Since we aren't intending on modifying the blue ball, make it const.

## Delegating constructors
- If want to overload constructors, and one of them has an additional field (for example)
	- Cannot call the first constructor within the other! It creates a temporary object which is destroyed.

> Don't call constructors directly from the body of another function

- Solution: delegate constructors, ie. **call the constructor in the member initialiser list**
	- Have the constructor with fewer parameters delegate to the one with more parameters
	- Note: constructor that delegates to another **CANNOT** do initialisation.
```CPP
    Employee(std::string_view name)
        : Employee{ name, 0 } {
// delegate initialization to Employee(std::string_view, int) constructor
    }

    Employee(std::string_view name, int id)
        : m_name{ name }, m_id { id } {// actually initializes the members
        std::cout << "Employee " << m_name << " created\n";
    }
```

- Solution 2: default arguments
```CPP
    Employee(std::string_view name, int id = 0) // default argument for id
        : m_name{ name }, m_id{ id } {
        std::cout << "Employee " << m_name << " created\n";
    }
```
- Note: there is again duplication of default values
	- `m_id` is default member initialised to 0 in declaration, then again in the constructor
	- No way to fix this. But can make it better
		- `static constexpr int default_id { 0 };`
			- Then use this, eg. `int id = default_id;`
			- With static, every `Employee` object would have hte same `default_id` member

# Temporary objects
- Can create temporary objects (and pass them to function) in 2 ways
	- `fn(IntPair{5,6})` // Default initialisation
	- `fn({5,6})` //Compiler **deduces necessary type from parameter**
```cpp
void print(IntPair p) { 
    std::cout << "(" << p.x() << ", " << p.y() << ")\n";
}

int main() {
    // Case 1: Pass variable
    IntPair p { 3, 4 };
    print(p);

    // Case 2: Construct temporary IntPair and pass to function
    print(IntPair { 5, 6 } );

    // Case 3: Implicitly convert { 7, 8 } to a temporary Intpair and pass to function
    print( { 7, 8 } );

    return 0;
}
```
- Can create temporary object `IntPair (3,4)` / `IntPair ();` etc. too. But not recommended.
	- A reminder that if we use a named variable, eg. `IntPair p();` will be taken as a **function declaration** instead!

## Casting: static_cast vs explicit instantiation of temporary object
```cpp
std::cout << static_cast<int>( c ) << '\n'; // static_cast returns a temporary int direct-initialized with value of c
    std::cout << int { c } << '\n';             // explicitly creates a temporary int list-initialized with value c
```
- Static cast
	- Internal syntax: `int tmp (c)`
	- Temporary object **direct-initialised**
- Explicity cast
	- Internal syntax: `int temp {c}`
	- Temporary object **list-initialised**
		- **NO narrowing allowed**

> Prefer static_cast when converting to a fundamental type, and a list-initialized temporary when converting to a class type.


# Copy constructor
- Used to initialise object with an existing object of same type
- **Implicit** copy constructor
	- If do not provide one, C++ will create implicit copy constructor
	- By default, does memberwise initialisation.
		- Each member will be initialised using corresponding member of lcass passed in as initialiser
- Explicitly requested **default**
	- `Foo(const Foo& f) = default;`
- **User defined** copy constructor
```CPP
    // Default constructor
    Fraction(int numerator=0, int denominator=1)
        : m_numerator{numerator}, m_denominator{denominator}{
    }

    // Copy constructor
    // Initialize our members using the corresponding member parameter
    Fraction(const Fraction& fraction)
        : m_numerator{ fraction.m_numerator }
        , m_denominator{ fraction.m_denominator } {
        std::cout << "Copy constructor called\n"; // just to prove it works
    }
```
> Prefer implicit one unless have specific reason to create own

- Delete copy constructor
	- `Foo(const Foo& f) = delete;`

- Parameter must be a reference

- **Pass by value** -> copy constructor is how pass by value works! (when argument and parameter are same type). object copied into the parameter.
- **Return by value** -> similarly, copy constructor used to copy into the function's return temporary object.
	- Eg. function returns Fraction, last line is `return f;`
		- Copies `f` into the unnamed return temporary object.

When are copies created?
- As long as not taking reference
- eg. `auto a = b;` //  a is created via copy constructor, passing in b
- `for (auto x : a)` // each x is created with copy constructor, passing in `a[0]`, etc.

# Rule of 5
- If object requires **any one** of the below, probably requires **all**
	- User-defined copy constructor
	- Destructor
	- Copy assignment operator
	- Move constructor
	- Move assignment operator

## Copy elision
- Compiler can optimise away unneccessary copying of objects
	- Sometimes, copy constructor not called altogether.
	- Copy elision exempt from the 'as-if' rule
- Mandatory in C++17
	- And, if mandatory, can happen even if copy constructor is deleted.

## Converting constructors
- Constructor that can be used to perform an implicit conversion 
- By default, **all** constructors are converting constructors.
```cpp
void printFoo(Foo f) {
}
printFoo(5.0); // We want to implicitly convert double value 5 to foo
```

- Only one user-defined defined conversion can be applied
```cpp
printFoo(5); // Fails, assuming Foo constructor is Foo (double d)

// 5 has to be converted to 5.0, then 5.0 converted to Foo. Two conversions
printFoo(5d); // ok.
printFoo(Foo{5}); // ok.
```

- `explicit` constructors
	- **Cannot** be used to do **copy** initialisation/**copy list** intialisation
	- **Cannot** be used to do **implicit conversiont** (since this uses copy initialisation or copy list initialisation)
	- Still **can** be used for **direct** and direct list initialisation
		- `Dollars d1{5}` // Ok.

- Note that `static_cast` returns object that is direct-initialised, so it **will** consider **explicit** constructors when performing conversion

- `explicit` prevents implicit conversions from return by value too
```cpp
class Foo {
	explicit Foo(int x) {
	}
};

Foo getFoo() {
	return 5; // fail, can't implicitly convert int to Foo
	return {5}; // fail, can't implicitly convert initialiser list to Foo
	return Foo{5}; //ok
}
```

> Best practice: make any **constructor** that takes in a **single argument** explicit by default
> Do not make copy/move constructors explicit since these don't perform conversions


# Constexpr aggregates and classes
Constexpr Constructor
- All paremeters usable at compile time
- All member initialisations are compile time constants
- Constructor has no side effects, no dynamic allocation, no virtual calls
- If constexpr member functions called inside constructor, they must be constexpr

Constexpr classes
- Has at least one constexpr constructor (defaulted or use defined)
- All data members are of types that can be constexpr
- Member functions you want to call at compile-time are marked constexpr

Aggregates
- Implicitly support constexpr

Constexpr member function
- Must be const-qualified if they don’t modify *this (most getters are)
- Must only call other constexpr functions or use literal types
- Cannot do forbidden runtime operations: I/O, dynamic allocation, virtual calls
- Can modify member variables if they are mutable and within constexpr context
- Can be static or non-static
- Can return non-void or void
- If want to call, must call from a constexpr object

Note:
- Case study: 
```cpp
constexpr int init() {
    Pair p { 5, 6 };    // ok, only requires constructor to be constexpr when evaluated at compile-time
    
    constexpr Pair g{p}; // NOT ok! p is not constexpr, so cannot use in constexpr expression.
    
    return p.greater(); // ok, only requires greater() to be constexpr when evaluated at compile-time
}
```
- It's okay that p is not constexpr. As long as its constructor and member function called are.
	- Local variables in constsexpr function don't need to be constexpr, but they must be possible to evaluate at compile time, ie. **constructor** needs to be constexpr
- The key is that everything must be **evaluatable** at compile time

## Constexpr member functions may be const or non-const
- They were const in C++11, but from C++14, no longer implicitly const
- So if we instantiate a `const` object, and we want to call `foo()`, making foo constexpr is not enough, we need to make it const as well.