# This pointer
- Within each class, the keyword `this` is a **const pointer that holds address** of current implicit object
	- `simple.setId(2);` -> `Simple::setId(&simple, 2);
	- `void setID(int id) { m_id = id; }` -> `static void setID(Simple* const this, int id) { this->m_id = id; }`
- Can return `*this`
	- Primary reason is to allow member functions to be "chained" together
```cpp
    Calc& add(int value) { m_value += value; return *this; }
    Calc& sub(int value) { m_value -= value; return *this; }
    Calc& mult(int value) { m_value *= value; return *this; }   
};

// Then can do
calc.add(5).sub(3).mult(4);
```

- Resetting class
```cpp
void reset() {
	*this = {};
}
```

# Classes and header files
- Can separate implementation from declaration by defining member functions outside of class definitions
```cpp
class Date {
private:
    int m_year{};
    int m_month{};
    int m_day{};

public:
    Date(int year, int month, int day); // constructor declaration

    void print() const; // print function declaration

    int getYear() const { return m_year; }
    int getMonth() const { return m_month; }
    int getDay() const  { return m_day; }
};

Date::Date(int year, int month, int day) // constructor definition
    : m_year{ year }
    , m_month{ month }
    , m_day{ day }
{
}
//etc.
```
- Just take note of `Date::` prefix before hte function definition

- Putting class definitions in header files
	- Unlike functions, compiler needs to see the **full definition** of a class for the type to be used
	- Thus, header files usually contain **full definition** of a class rather than forward declaration of class
		- Data members, **inline/constexpr** member functions.
		- Non-inline functions only need declaration in header, definition can be in .cpp
- Common setup
	- Classes defined in header file of same name, member functions just declarations.
		- Does not violate ODR. Remember that **types**
	- Member functions defined in .cpp file of same name
		- Member functions defined **inside** class definition are **implicitly inline**
		- Member functions defined **outside** class definition not implicitly inline (hence, here in a .cpp file)
	- `#include` the header in files that want to use the class

> Put default arguments for member functions inside class definition

# Nested types
```cpp
class Fruit {
public:
	enum Type {
		apple,
		banana,
		cherry
	};
	//etc
```

> Define nested types at top of class type

- Nested follow normal access rules (in this case, public)
- Class types act as scope region for names declared within, just like namespaces
	- We use unscoped enumerator here, since the class itself is already acting like a scope region. This saves us from having to do `Fruit::Type::Apple`
	- So FQN of Type is `Fruit::Type`, FQN of `apple` is `Fruit::Apple`
	- Within members of the class, can just `apple` instead of FQN

- Nested classes
	- Does not have access to the `this` pointer of the outer class!
	- However, can acces **private members** of the outer class that are in scope

- Forward declaration
	- Nested type can be forward declared within the class that encloses it
		- However, can't forward declare nested type prior to outer class definition
```cpp
class outer {
public:
    class inner1;   // okay: forward declaration inside the enclosing class 
    class inner1{}; // okay: definition of forward declared type inside the enclosing class
    class inner2;   // okay: forward declaration inside the enclosing class 
};

class inner2 // okay: definition of forward declared type outside the enclosing class
{
};

```

# Destructors
- Called **automatically** when object of non-aggregate class type is destroyed
- Rules
	- Same name as class, preceded by tilde (~)
	- No arguments, no return type
	- Only one
- Object is only destroyed after the destructor executes
	- Thus can call member functions, and do other cleanup stuff
- Implicit destructor
	- If non-aggregate class type has no user-declared destructor, compiler generates destructor with empty body

> Generally, don't call destructor explicitly

- **Unhandled exceptions** will cause program to terminate, and may not unwind stack before doing so.
	- If stack unwinding does not happen, **destructors will not be called**
- Same with std::exit(); local variables not destroyed first, no destructors called before program ends.

# Static member variables
```cpp
struct Something {
    static int s_value; // declare s_value as static (initializer moved below)
};

int Something::s_value{ 1 }; // define and initialize s_value to 1 
```
- Not associated with class objects
	- Can access without even instantiating an object
	- Call with `Class::variable`

- Created at start of program and destroyed at end of program, lifetime not bound to class object
- Basically, global variables that live inside scope region of the class

- Must explicitly define (and optionally initialize) the static member **outside of the class**, inside global scope
	- Declare in class, but just not actually defining it (like forward declaration)
	- Non-template classes: class in header, static member definition in .cpp OR static member **inline** and below class definition in header (if in header, must be inline to prevent ODR violation)
	- Template: static member definition directly underneath template class definition (no ODR violation since implicitly inline)

- Initialising static member variables **inside the class definition**
	- If static member is constant integral type or const enum, can initialise inside class definition
		- `static const int s_value{4};` //const -> ok since compile time constant
		- `static inline int s_value{4};` //inline -> ok
		- `static constexpr int s_value{4};` //constexpr -> implicitly inline (C++17), ok

> Make static members **inline** or **constexpr** so they can be initialised inside class defintion
- Except for members that open files, allocate memory, have side effects at initialisation etc.
- Or large objects where multiple definitions may increase compile time

Example use: unique ID to every instancce
```cpp
class Something {
private:
    static inline int s_idGenerator { 1 };
    int m_id {};

public:
    // grab the next value from the id generator
    Something() : m_id { s_idGenerator++ } {
    }

    int getID() const { return m_id; }
};
```

- Only static members can use type deduction (auto, CTAD)
	- Non static members may not

```cpp
class Foo {
    auto m_x { 5 };           // auto not allowed for non-static members
    std::pair m_v { 1, 2.3 }; // CTAD not allowed for non-static members

    static inline auto s_x { 5 }; // auto allowed for static members
    static inline std::pair s_v { 1, 2.3 }; // CTAD allowed for static members
```

# Static member functions
- Have no `this` pointer
- Can be defined outside class definition
	- If defined **outside** class definition, no longer **implicitly inline**. Must make **inline** to not violate ODR, especially if in header file.
- C++ does not support static constructors
	- If static variable can be directly initialised, just initialise it at point of definition.
	- If static variable requires executing some code, there are other ways to do it eg.
		- Use static function, create an object, fill it with data then return to caller.


# Friend non-member functions
- To give some class/function access to **private and protected** members of another class.
	- Not affected by access controls, so does not matter where within the body it is placed
- Even if placed inside class, treated as **non-member function**

```cpp
class Accumulator {
private:
    int m_value { 0 };

public:
    void add(int value) { m_value += value; }

    // Here is the friend declaration that makes non-member function void print(const Accumulator& accumulator) a friend of Accumulator
    friend void print(const Accumulator& accumulator);
};

void print(const Accumulator& accumulator){
    // Because print() is a friend of Accumulator
    // it can access the private members of Accumulator
    std::cout << accumulator.m_value;
}
```

- Can also define print() directly within Accumulator, and it will be treated as **non-member**

- Function can be friend of **multiple classes**
- When using friend functions, prefer to use the public interface rather than access members directly, if possible
	- Same idea as preferring non-member functions over member functions

> Prefer non-friend functions if possible
## Class forward declarations
```cpp
class Humidity; // forward declaration of Humidity
```
- Eg. `friend void print(const Humidity& humidity)` within Temperature class. Need to declare Humidity so compiler knows what that is.


# Friend classes and member functions
- Unlike member functions, forward declaration **not enough!**
	- Forward declaration satisfies **reference** to the **class**, but NOT references to the **class members**
	- To access the members, needs to see **whole definition**

## Friend classes
- Need whole definition!
```cpp
class Storage {
private:
    int m_nValue {};
    double m_dValue {};
public:
    Storage(int nValue, double dValue)
       : m_nValue { nValue }, m_dValue { dValue }
    { }

    // Make the Display class a friend of Storage
    friend class Display;
};

class Display {
public:
    Display(bool displayIntFirst)
         : m_displayIntFirst { displayIntFirst }
    {
    }

    // Because Display is a friend of Storage, Display members can access the private members of Storage
    void displayStorage(const Storage& storage)
    {
        if (m_displayIntFirst)
            std::cout << storage.m_nValue << ' ' << storage.m_dValue << '\n';
        else // display double first
            std::cout << storage.m_dValue << ' ' << storage.m_nValue << '\n';
    }
```

## Friend member functions
- Forward declaration to reference the class, entire definition to reference the member
```cpp
class Storage; // forward declaration for class Storage
class Display {
private:
	bool m_displayIntFirst {};

public:
	Display(bool displayIntFirst)
		: m_displayIntFirst { displayIntFirst }
	{
	}

	void displayStorage(const Storage& storage) // forward declaration needed for this
	{
		if (m_displayIntFirst)
			std::cout << storage.m_nValue << ' ' << storage.m_dValue << '\n';
		else // display double first
			std::cout << storage.m_dValue << ' ' << storage.m_nValue << '\n';
	}
};

class Storage {
private:
	int m_nValue {};
	double m_dValue {};
public:
	Storage(int nValue, double dValue)
		: m_nValue { nValue }, m_dValue { dValue }
	{
	}

	// Make the Display::displayStorage member function a friend of the Storage class
	friend void Display::displayStorage(const Storage& storage); // okay now
};
```
- Best way to get around all the forward declaration and definition rules
	- Put each class definition in separate header files, with member function definitions in corresponding .cpp file

- Properties
	- Not symmetric. A->B does not imply B->A
	- Not transitive. A->B and B->C does not imply A->B->C
	- 


Notes for actual code, and compiling in .cpp and .h files
- Prefer forward declarations to inclusion
	- Especially for friends, eg. Vector3d has a member function that is declared friend of Point3d. Cannot include Vector.h in Point3d.h and vice versa, cyclic dependency!
		- Instead, **forward declare** Vector3d in Point3d.h
	- Inlude if 
		- Must use object directly
		- Inherit
		- Use infline functions involving the type
- Remember to end off class defintiions with `;`

# Ref qualifiers
- Note: can overload functions this way!
```cpp
const std::string& getName() const &  { return m_name; } //  & qualifier overloads function to match only lvalue implicit objects

std::string  getName() const && { return m_name; } // && qualifier overloads function to match only rvalue implicit objects
```

- KIV: something about std::move. return to this.

- For a given function, non-ref-qualified overloads and ref-qualified overloads **cannot coexist**
- Similar to how a **const lvalue reference** can bind to an **rvalue**
	- if only a **const lvalue-qualified function** exists, it will accept either lvalue **or** rvalue implicit objects

> Not recommended to use. 