# const
- I promise not to change this value once it has been assigned
- Enfores immutability for objects as well.
	- eg. `const p1{...};`
	- `p1.x = 3' // NOT ALLOWED`
- Must be initialised
	- Because if not, there would be no way to ever assign a value to it
- Is part of the object's type
- Function 
	- Parameters - can make const, but we don't usually care since it's just a copy that will be destroyed. don't use const
	- Return type - similar. don't use const
	- `const` member functions: promises not to modify the object it belongs to
- When to use const
	- Protect variables from accidental modification
	- Pointers that should not be modified
	- Used to enforce immutability in interfaces
	- `void printVal(const int& val)` where val should not be removed
- Cannot bind non const reference to a const object
```CPP
const std::string s{"Hello"};
std::string& ref = s;  // NOT ALLOWED. can modify s through ref
```
- **Important note for pointers**
	- `const char *p` -> this means that whatever the pointer points to cannot be modified, however p can be reassigned!!
		- Ie. this makes an immutable array (at least, not mutable through p)
		- Read only pointer view
		- See std::string_view (below)
- eg.
```CPP
char arr[] = "Hello";      // mutable array
const char* p = arr;

arr[0] = 'J';              // ✅ allowed, underlying array is still mutable
// *p = 'J';               // ❌ not allowed through p
```
# constexpr
- Unlike const, is **not** part of object's type
- constexpr -> const
	- Since constexpr implies const, usually the type is **const**
- Value is known and fixed at compile time
	- Can be used in contexts that require compile-time constants
		- eg. array sizes, template parameters, switch cases
- Functions
	- Return value can be computed at compile time
	- C++ version dependent
		- C++ 14 onwards: can have branches, loops, etc.
	- Can be used in constant expression
- Can only make variable constexpr if type is **literal**
	- eg. bool, int, double
		- or user-defined types that are trivially constructible and have a constexpr constructor
		- no runtime allocation, side effects or non-literal members
	- `std::string` -> cannot be constexpr before C++20
A **variable can be declared `constexpr`** if:
1. Its **type has a `constexpr` constructor** (for classes/structs).
2. All **constructor arguments are constant expressions**.
3. All **members of the type are literal types**.

**Rule of Thumb:**

> Use `constexpr` whenever the value is known at compile-time and could be used in compile-time contexts. 
> Use `const` if it can’t be known at compile-time or depends on runtime computation
# Literals
|Literal value|Examples|Default literal type|Note|
|---|---|---|---|
|integer value|5, 0, -3|int||
|boolean value|true, false|bool||
|floating point value|1.2, 0.0, 3.4|double (not float!)||
|character|‘a’, ‘\n’|char||
|C-style string|“Hello, world!”|const char[14]|see C-style string literals section below|
Can modify literal type by adding suffix

|Data type|Suffix|Meaning|
|---|---|---|
|integral|u or U|unsigned int|
|integral|l or L|long|
|integral|ul, uL, Ul, UL, lu, lU, Lu, LU|unsigned long|
|integral|ll or LL|long long|
|integral|ull, uLL, Ull, ULL, llu, llU, LLu, LLU|unsigned long long|
|integral|z or Z|The signed version of std::size_t (C++23)|
|integral|uz, uZ, Uz, UZ, zu, zU, Zu, ZU|std::size_t (C++23)|
|floating point|f or F|float|
|floating point|l or L|long double|
|string|s|std::string|
|string|sv|std::string_view|
eg, `float f {4.1f}` -> default type for 4.1 is double. need suffix to make it a lfoat
## C- style string literals
- eg. "Hello world"
	- Type: `const char[14]
	- Has implicit null terminator
	- Other literals are just values, but C-style literals are **const objects** created at start of program and guaranteed to exist for entirety of program
- Note about char arr and char pointers
	- `const char arr[5] = "Hello";`
	- `const char* p = arr;` //OK. Array decays to pointer
		- Array **decays** to pointer, but p and arr are fundamentally different types, with different sizes etc.
		- This means p now stores the address of `arr[0]`. That's all
		- eg. `arr` cannot be reassigned, `p` can.

## std::string
- `#include <string>`
- `std::string name { "Alex" };`
- Can use in cout
- Can handle strings of different lengths
	- `name = "bob";`
- `using namespace std::string_literals; // easy access to the s suffix`
	- Then can create string literals with the 's' suffix
	- `"Hello"s`
		- Resolves to `std::string{ "Hello" , 5 }`
- Creates a **copy** of its initialiser
	- Unlike std::stringview, does not have to worry about what happens to the initialise after the initialisation is finished.

## std::stringview (C++17)
- `#include <string>`
- Problem: string copying is slow
	- `std::string s{ "Hello, world!" };`
		- This makes a new copy of the "Hello, world!" literal in s memory
- `std::string_view` provies **read-only** access to existing string
	- `std::string_view s{ "Hello, world!" }; // now a std::string_view`
	- Can pass (s) into a function without copying
- Is a bit like a reference, but 
	- Can bind to many things (`std::string`, string literal, char [])
	- Can be reassigned
	- Can refer to substring
- **NOTE: DOES NOT EXTEND LIFETIME** (unlike references)
	- Important example: 
	- `std::string_view sv = std::string("Hello");  // DANGEROUS`
		- CANT DO THIS!
		- The temporary `std::string` object is **destroyed immediately**
		- Because the `std::string` object is **not a named object**, is just a **temporary object**
	- **So whatever we point sv to has to persistent in memory**
		- eg. can't be getName(), since whatever's returned will be temporary also.
		- It either has to be bound to a name already, or a string literal
- Implementation 
	- Essentially just a `const char *` and `size_t length`.

```CPP

class string_view {
private:
	const char *ptr; //const ptr: what the ptr points to cannot be modified.
	size_t length;

public:
	string_view(char * p, size_t l):p {p}, length{l} {};
	const char& operator[](std::size_t i) { 
		return ptr[i];
	}; // need to return const here since ptr is of type const char*
};

```
- Must explicity cast to std::string if we wwant it
	- `static_cast<std::string>(sv)`
- Can use `sv` suffix to ge a `std::string_view`
- Why not just use `const std::string&`? ie reference to the string?
	- **KIV**
- Modifying a std::string will likely invalidate the std::stringview bound to it
```CPP
std::string s{"Hello"};
std::string_view sv {s}; // sv views s
s = "New"; // s reassigned
// s will return the memory used for the old string data back into os, so that old memory becomes dangling

std::cout <<sv; // undefined behaviour

// however, modifying the memory in place is ok
s[1] = 'x'; //ok
```
- Careful when returning stringview from a function
	- If its bound to a std:: string, that std::string will be destroyed after function returns so sv views a destroyed object
	- But if its bound to a string literal, literals exist throughout program lifetime so ok.
	- Can return if it's the same string_view taken from function parameter
		- Since the objects they view will still exist in the caller's scope
- View modification  and substrings
	- `sv.remove_prefix(1);`
	- `sv.remove_suffix(2);`
	- `sv_sub = sv.substr(7, 5); //index 7, length 5
- Note: may not be null terminated

## When to use what
- Variables
	- std::string
		- Need to modify
		- Need user input text
		- Need store return value of a function that returns this
	- std::string_view
		- Only need read-access to part/all of a string that already exists, and will not be modified/destroyed before use of sv is complete
		- Need symbolic constant for C-style string
		- Need to continue viewing the return value of a function that returns a C-style string/non-dangling std::string_view
- Function param
	- std::string
		- Need to modify string passed in argument without affecting caller (rare)
		- C++14 or older, and dont want to use reference 
	- std::string_view
		- Need read-only string
		- Function needs to work with non null-terminated strings
	- const std::string&
		- Older than C++14, function needs read only string
		- Calling other functions that require a const std::string, const std::string&, or const C-style string (since sd::string_view may not be null-terminated)
	- std::string&
		- Using std::string as out-parameter
		- Calling other functions that require std::string&
- Return types
	- std::string
		- Return value is a std::string local variable or function parameter.
		- Return value is a function call or operator that returns a std::string by value.
	- std::string_view
		- returns a C-style string literal or local std::string_view that has been initialized with a C-style string literal.
		- returns a std::string_view parameter
