# Syntax
`[capture clause] (param) -> return type {statements}
eg. 
```cpp
eg.
auto divide = [](int a, int b) -> double { return (double) a/b; }; 
// can also initialise divide with {}
```
- The only **mandatory** parts are 
	- `[]{}`
# Captures
- For lambdas to be able to **access** objects that are **not** any of the following:
	- Static storage duration (global variables, static locals)
	- Objects that are **constexpr** (explicitly or implicitly)

- Creates a **clone** of that variable inside the lambda
	- Become **data member** of the lambda functor
	- Treated as **const** by default (can't modify within function)
	- To capture more then one vairable, use `[x,y,etc]`
### Mutable captures
- To modify captured variables
	- Modifies its **own cloned copy**
- Captured values **persist among multiple calls to lambda**
	- Remember, they are just **data members** of the lambda object
```cpp
auto shoot { [ammo] () mutable {
		--ammo; 
	}
};
```
### Capture by reference
```cpp
auto shoot {
	[&ammo]() {--ammo;}
};
```

### Default captures
- Captures **ALL** variables mentioned in the lambda. 
	- If not mentioned, not captured
- `[=]` Capture ALL by **value**
- `[&]` Capture ALL by **reference**
- Mixing
```cpp
// Capture enemies by reference and everything else by value.
[=, &enemies](){};

// Capture armor by value and everything else by reference.
[&, armor](){};

// Illegal, we already said we want to capture everything by reference.
[&, &armor](){};
```

### Defining new variables in lambda capture
```cpp
[userArea{width * height}] (int knownArea) {};
```
> Only initialise variables in capture if value is short and type is obvious, else define outside lambda and capture it.

### Problem: Dangling captures
- Variables **captured** at the point where **lambda is defined**
	- If variable captured by reference dies before lambda, lambda left holding dangling reference

```cpp
// returns a lambda
auto makeWalrus(const std::string& name) {
  // Capture name by reference and return the lambda.
  return [&]() {
    std::cout << name;
  };
}

int main(){
  // Create a new walrus whose name is Roofus.
  // sayName is the lambda returned by makeWalrus.
  auto sayName{ makeWalrus("Roofus") };

  // Call the lambda function that makeWalrus returned.
  sayName();
}
```
- The lambda in makeWalrus() **captures** the **temporary** string by **reference**.
	- Temporary string **dies** after  `auto sayName{ makeWalrus("Roofus") };` 
	- `sayName();` -> reference is dangling.
- Even if we change makeWalrus to pass by value, this still fails
	- `name` dies at the end of `makeWalrus()`
	- lambda is left holding a **dangling reference.**
- Here, we should capture `name` by **value** instead.

### Problem: Unintended copies of mutable lambdas
#### Lambda copying
```cpp
// Eg.1
auto count{ [i]() mutable {
	std::cout << ++i << '\n';
} };

count(); // >> 1

auto otherCount{ count }; // create a copy of count

count(); // >> 2
otherCout(); // >> 2
```
- When we create copy of count, we create a copy of count **in its current state**
	- Captured `i` =1 for the otherCount.

#### Lambda type not matching reference parameter type -> copy of lambda made
```cpp
// Eg.2
void myInvoke(const std::function<void()>& fn) {
    fn();
}

int i{0};
auto count {[i]()mutable {std::cout << ++i<<"\n";}};
myInvoke(count); // >> 1
myInvoke(count); // >> 1
myInvoke(count); // >> 1
```

- lambda type doesnt match reference paramater type std::function
	- Lambda converted to temporary std::function so reference parameter can bind to it
	- Thus a **copy** of the lambda is being made.

Solutions
- Put lambda into std::function directly
```cpp
std::function count{ [i]() mutable { // lambda object stored in a std::function
      std::cout << ++i << '\n';
} };
```

- Wrap count in a **std::reference_wrapper**
	- std::ref(count) ensures count is treated like a reference. So anything that tried to copy count will actually copy the **reference**
```cpp
myInvoke(std::ref(count));
myInvoke(std::ref(count));
myInvoke(std::ref(count));
```

> Remember that STL functions may copy function objects (reminder: lambdas are function objects)
> If want to provide lambdas with mutable captured variables, pass them by reference using std::ref

> Try to avoid mutable lambdas. 

## Passing lambdas to functions
```cpp
// 1. std::function
void repeat1(int repetitions, const std::function<void(int)>& fn))

// 2. function template with type template param
template <typename T>
void repeat2(int repetitions, const T& fn)

// 3. abbreviate function template syntax (C++ 20)
void repeat3(int repetitions, const auto& fn)

// 4. function pointer (only for lambda with no captures
```cpp
void repeat4(int repetitions, void (*fn)(int))
```
- 1. std::function
	- Requires lambda to be **implicitly converted** whenever function is called, thus overhead.
- 2,3. Function template
	- When function called, function insantiated, where T matches the actual type of the lambda.
		- T = `<lambda's unique type>`
	- Why **const reference**?
		- Because lambda is a **temporary object (rvalue)**, so need const T& to bind to temporary (life time extended)
		- **Special case: mutable lambdas (KIV)**
			- Use T&& instead.
				- Note: T&& in templates are not just rvalue references, they are **forwarding references**. Can bind to **both rvalue and lvalue**, not just the former like T&& usually is limited to.
				- Reference collapsing + type deduction
- 4. Function pointer
	- Lambda with no captures implicitly converts to function pointer