Problems with structs (as aggregates)
- Cannot document and enforce class invariants
	- Class invariants: condition that must be true throughout lifetime of object in order for object to remain in valid state

# Member variables
- **Parentheses disallowed** in **member default initialisers** due to most vexing parse
- Creation order: in order of declaration
	- **NOT initialiser list order**
- Destruction order: in reverse order of declaration
```cpp
class A {
	int x = 5; // ok
	int x(5); // compile error, not ok.
	int x{5}; // ok.
}; 
```

## Const member variables
- Have to be instantiated at the point of declaration, or with **constructor's member intialiser list**
	- eg. `m_id{id}` inside the constructor initialiser list (not constructor body!!)
	- Copy initialising won't work since it's const
- Important: If class has const member, **copy assignment (for the class) is deleted automatically**
	- Because that const variable can't be reassigned.
	- `Foo a; Foo b{a};` ok. this is copy **construction**
	- `b=a;` not ok

# Member functions
- `joe.someFunction();`

## Const member functions
- Must make member funciton **const** to call it from a 
	- **const object**
	- **const reference to an object, even if obj not const (remember this!)**
```cpp
class Foo {
    int x;
public:
    int getX() const { return x; } // const member function
};
```
- The implicit `this` pointer becomes a **pointer to const**, so the function cannot modify any member variables
	- eg. try to modify member variable with `this->x = val;` (after compiler adds `this->`), but `this` is of type `const Foo* const` for const object, so not allowed.
- Must appear in **both** declaration and definition
- Is part of **function signature**, so **can overload**
	- But only necessary to overload if the return value has to differ in constness
	- If not, the const function can be called by 

# Const class objects
```cpp
const Obj o1 {...};
```
- Cannot
	- Modify implicit object (change data members)
	- Call non-const member functions
- Can
	- Modify **other** objects that arent the implicit object
	- Call **const** member functions
	- Call non-member functions
	- Be called on a  **non-const** object

# Constexpr classes, members, member functions
- Class
	- Class can be used in compile-time constant expressions if (**all** of the below)
		- All non-static data members are **literal** types, no heap-allocated members (eg. std::string, etc. allowed)
		- **Constexpr constructor** that can **initialize all members**, and only perform operations that are constant expression evaluable
		- **Destructor** must be trivial or **constexpr**
		- **No runtime** only operations
- Member 
	- To make constexpr, must be **literal** types
		- No heap allocation, no std::string, std::vector, dynamically allocated objects..
- Member function
	- Function must be **evaluatable at compile time**. Only uses literal types, arithmetics, comparisons, conditional expressions, calls to other constexpr functions etc.
	- **The object it is called upon must also exist at compile time** -> must have **constexpr constructor**
		- ie. NEED A **CONSTEXPR OBJECT!!!!**


# Access specifiers
3 Types: public, private, protected
- Members of struct are public by default. Public members can be accessed by other members of class type and public
- Members of class private by default. Can only be accessed by other members of same class.

> Name private variables with "m_" prefix

```cpp
class Date {
// Any members defined here would default to private
public: // here's our public access specifier
    void print() const { // public due to above public: specifier
        // members can access other private members
        std::cout << m_year << '/' << m_month << '/' << m_day;
    }

private: // here's our private access specifier
    int m_year { 2020 };  // private due to above private: specifier
    int m_month { 14 }; // private due to above private: specifier
    int m_day { 10 };   // private due to above private: specifier
};
```

| Access level | Access specifier | Member access | Derived class access | Public access |
| ------------ | ---------------- | ------------- | -------------------- | ------------- |
| Public       | public:          | yes           | yes                  | yes           |
| Protected    | protected:       | yes           | yes                  | no            |
| Private      | private:         | yes           | no                   | no            |
> Classes should generally make member variables private/protected and member functions public
> Structs should generally avoid using access specifiers (all members default to public)

- Remember that access specifiers are per-class, **not per-object** 
	- **Private** member of object A of class X **can** be accessed by object B of class X.

# Access functions
- Getters and setters (recall 2030)
- Getters should return by value or by const lvalue reference
- Prefer implenting behaviours or acctions instead of accessing functions. 
	- eg. instead of `setAlive(bool)` setter, implement `kill()` and `revive()`

## Returning a reference to data member
- `const std::string& getName() const { return m_name; }`
	- Return by const lvalue reference
- Okay, but **must make sure that the object still exists** when using this function!
- eg.
```cpp
const std::string& ref { createEmployee("Garbo").getName() }; // not ok. reference becomes dangling when return 
std::string val { createEmployee("Hans").getName() }; // ok. makes copy of referenced member
```
- "Garbo" is an **rvalue object**, destroyed after the expression
	- The reference to the member then becomes a **dangling reference**