# Numeric Promotion 
- Narrower numeric types to wider numeric types
- Types
	- Float to double
	- Integral promotion
		- signed char/short -> int
		- unsigned char, char8_t, unsigned short -> int (if can hold entire range of type), else unsigned int
		- if char is signed by default, followed the signed char conversion rules above. if unsigned, follows the signed rules above.
		- bool -> int (1 or 0)

## Integral promotion
- If type is smaller than int, it gets promoted to int or unsigned int during evaluation
	- However they are still stored as the original type! 
		- Promotion is temporary
- Types affected
	- `bool`
	- `char`
	- signed and unsigned `char`
	- signed and unsigned `short`
- What do they get promoted to?
	- The first type in this list that can represent all its values
	- `int`
	- `unsigned int`
	- `long`
	- `unsigned long`
	- etc.
```cpp
char a = 100;  
char b = 30;  
auto c = a + b; // type of c is int

unsigned char a = 250;  
unsigned char b = 10;  
auto c = a + b; // type of c is int, no oveflow
```

# Numeric conversions
- integral to other integral (eg. int -> short, int -> long, short -> char)
- floating point to other floating point (double, loat, long double)
- floating to integral
- integral to floating
- integral/floating to bool

## Widening conversions
- Allowed by brace initialisation
## Narrowing conversions
- **Brace** initialisation **disallows** narrowing conversions
	- Need to use static cast
```cpp
static_cast<int> (d);
```

### Constexpr clause
- A conversion may no longer be narrowing if
	- Original value is **constexpr**
	- Value can be stored **exactly** in detination type
```cpp
constexpr int n1{4};
unsigned int u1{n1}; //narrowing but allowed due to constexpr exclusion
```
- Why need to be **constexpr**?
	- If not, compiler cannot prove it's safe at compile time
- Remember that constexpr things include
	- constexpr variables
	- constexpr literals, eg. `5`
	- return values of constexpr functions
	- constexpr constructors/objects

## Numeric promotion and conversion examples
```cpp
int main() {
    int a { 5 }; // no conversion
    int b { 'a' }; // promotion, char->int
    int c { 5.4 }; // narrowing, not allowed
    int d { true }; // promotion, bool->int
    int e { static_cast<int>(5.4) }; // explicit narrowing cast, double->int

    double f { 5.0f }; // float->double
    double g { 5 }; // int->double

    // Extra credit section
    long h { 5 }; // int->long

    float i { f }; // narrowing, double->float not allowed.
    float j { 5.0 }; // **5.0 is a constexpr!** and fits in float, so ok. doube -> float implicit narrowing conversion allowed. see constexpr clause above

}
```

# Arithmetic conversions
- Conversions when evaluting operands in operation
	- If operands are of different types, what common type to convert bnoth into?
	- eg. `auto {2+3.5}`
Rank:
- long double
- double
- float
- long long
- long
- int

Steps:
1. Integer promotions
- Small types get promoted first, see *Integer promotion* above
- If A is integral, B is floating, A converted to floating

2. Rank rules
- If one operand is signed and one unsigned, see special rules below
- Otherwise, the operand with **lower rank** converted to type with **higher rank**

Special case: unsigned and signed
- Case A: rank(unsigned) >= rank(signed)
	- signed converted to unsigned type
- Case B: not A, but signed type can represent all unsigned values
	- unsigned converted to signed type
- Case C: not A, and signed type cannot represent all unsigned values
	- signed converted to unsigned type

# Implicit type conversions 
- eg. 
- `double d{3};`
- Can fail
	- eg. `int x{"14"};` // cannot convert string to int
	- `int x{3.5}` // narrowing disallowed by brace initialisation


# Explicit type conversions (casting)
- static_cast
	- `static_cast<int>(3.0)`
	- int->double, char->int etc.
	- **Loss of data allowed.**
	- Changing sign:
		- If destination type is **unsigned**, the value will be **modulo wrapped**
		- if destination type is **signed**, the value is **implementation-defined** (pre C++20) or modulo wrapped (C++20)
- dynamic_cast (will revisit)
	- Safe runtime check for polymorphic types (classes with virtual functions)
	- Only works with pointers/references to classes with at least one virtual function
	- Can check if base pointer actually pointer to derived objects
	- Returns nullptr for pointer casts if cast fails, throws `std::bad_cast` for references
eg.
```CPP
class Base { virtual void f() {} };
class Derived : public Base {};

Base* b = new Derived;
Derived* d = dynamic_cast<Derived*>(b); // safe downcast
```
- const_cast
	- `int* ptr = const_cast<int*>(&x);`
	- add/remove `const` or `volatile` froma variable
	- often used to call a function that wrongly doesn't take a const reference
- reinterpret_cast
	- convert any pointer type to another pointer type
	- `char* p = reinterpret_cast<char*> (&a)`
- C-style casts
	- eg. `double(x)` or `(double) x`
	- Tried to perform const, static, reinterpret in order.
	- One thing can do with this that can't do with C++ style casts: **convert derived object to base class that is inaccessible (eg. cos it was privately inherited)**
> Try to avoid C-style casts.

## Casting vs initialising a temporary object
- `x`, want to convert to `int`
	-  `static_cast<int>(x)`, which returns a temporary `int` object _direct-initialized_ with `x`.
	-  `int { x }`, which creates a temporary `int` object _direct-list-initialized_ with `x`.
- Avoid the `(int) x` which is C-style cast

- 3 differences
	- `int {x};` uses list initialisation which disallows narrowing conversions
	- `static_cast` makes it clear that we are performing conversion
	- direct list initialisation of a temporary only allows **single-word** type names
		- `unsigned int {x}` is not allowed
# Void casting
```cpp
(void) x;
static_cast<void>(x);
[[maybe_unused]] x;
```
- All these do the same thing
- Doesn't modify x or change it's type, just tells compiler that this variable is unused on purpose, don't warn.

# Converting Constructors, and explicit keyword
- Converting constructor
	- Converting constructor = constructor that can be used to perform an implicit conversion
- `printFoo(5)`
	- Prior to C++17
		- 5 implicitly converted to temporary Foo using the Foo(int) constructor
		- Temporary `Foo` then copy constructed into parameter f
	- C++ 17 onward
		- Copy is **mandatorily elided**
		- Parameter `f` is copy initialised with value `5`, and **no call to copy constructed required**
			- Will work even if copy constructor is deleted

- **ONLY ONE** user-defined conversion can be applied
	- eg. printFoo(5.0) rejected since need to convert 5.0 -> 5 -> foo

- `explicit` keyword
	- Tells compiler that constructor should **not** be used as converting constructor
	- Applies even for returning the object as well. No conversions

> Don't make copy and move constructors explicit
> Usually, don't make default constructors with no parameters explicit, or ones that take in multiple arguments
> Usually, make constructors that take in single argument explicit

# Dynamic casting - for safe inheritance casting
- For **safely** converting pointers/references within an inheritance hierarchy at runtime, using RTTI (runtime type info)
	- Requires vtable info, ie. at least one virtual function in the base class
		- The type being cast **from** must have at least one virtual function
- Downcasting
	- Get derived pointer from base pointer
	- Check: **is the real, most-derived type of the object being pointed to by b actually Derived?**
	- Static_cast -> no checks
```cpp
Base* b = getObject(); 
if (auto* d = dynamic_cast<Derived*>(b)) { d->derivedOnlyMethod(); }
```
- Upcasting is safe, just use static_cast
- Cross-casting
	- Casting between siubling branches in multiple inheritance hierarchy
		- Static_cast can't do this
```cpp
struct A { virtual ~A() = default; };
struct B { virtual ~B() = default; };
struct C : A, B {};

A* a = new C;
B* b = dynamic_cast<B*>(a);  // works — crosses from A branch to B branch
```

> Always ensure your dynamic casts actually succeeded by checking for a null pointer result.