# Size of an object - factors
## Size of all non-static data members
- Static members are not part of class object!
	- Are either in BSS or Data section of memory
		- If const, may be in `.rodata` (read only)

## Order of data members
- Padding
	- Struct's total size must be a multiple of the **largest member's alignment**
	- Member padding
		- Each member placed at next address satisfying its alignmen
	- Ordering matters
- Why?
	- Hardware optimisations
	- eg. Data that resides on **cache line boundary**
		- Will take more cycles to access this data
		- May cause thrashing where 2 cache lines are invalidated instead of one, when loading the data into cache
- How much padding?
	- Walk through members top to bottom, keeping a running offset. 
		- For each member, round the offset up to its alignment. 
		- At the end, round the struct size up to the largest alignment. 

> Sort members from largest alignment to smallest to minimise internal gaps


## Size of immediate base class
- Size of class also includes the size of its immediate base class

## Virtual functions
- If at least one, needs to store vtable pointer

## Compiler used
- Affects byte alignment

## Virtual inheritance
- Overhead of 4 bytes for virtual base pointer in that class

# Empty Base class Optimisation (EBO)
- Empty class
	- Only contain type members, nonvirtual function members and static data members
	- However have nonzero size (sizeof(x) = 1)
- EBO
	- If empty class used as **base class**, **no space** needs to be allocated for it, provided that it **does not** cause it to be allocated to the **same address as another object/subobject of the same type**
		- eg. below
```cpp
class Empty {
};

class EmptyToo : public Empty {
};

class NonEmpty : public Empty, public EmptyToo {
};
```
- NonEmpty has size 2 instead of 1, because it has 2 bases that have the same type (subtype), and these 2 bases need to have separate addresses

# Other applications of EBO
- Stateless deleters (custom deleters) in `unique_ptr`
	- The deleters take no size! 

# no_unique_address
```cpp
template <typename T, typename U>
struct compressed_pair_cpp20 {
    [[no_unique_address]] T _val1;
    [[no_unique_address]] U _val2;
};

```
- Empty members can share same address as other subobjects
	- However, 2 members of the **same type** CANNOT occupy the same address
		- C++ requires members of the same type to have distinct addresses, to compare if they are equal (through address)