# Compilation
1. Preprocessing
	- `#include <iostream>`, `#include "file.h"`
		- Literally copy paste the contents of the file 
			- Note: `<iostream>` contains `namespace std{...}`
	- expand macros 
		- `#define PI 3.14` -> every instance of PI becomes 3.14
	- handle conditional compilation
		- `#ifdef`, `#ifndef
2. Compilation
	- Individual .cpp files get compiled into .o files, but not linked yet
3. Assembly
4. Linking
	- Resolve symbols
		- For each undefined symbol, linker searchers other object files, static libraries (.a, .lib), dynamic/shared libraries (.so, .dll)
	- Combine object files into one executable
	- Assign final memory addresses for code, global/static variables, constants

# Preprocessor
```CPP
// see above
#include <iostream>    // copy paste into file
#define MY_NAME "Alex" // replaced by "Alex"
#define USE_YEN        // replaced by NOTHING

#define DEBUG
#ifdef DEBUG
    std::cout << "debug\n"; // will be compiled since DEBUG is defined
#endif


NOTE: SCOPE OF PREPROCESSOR COMMANDS ONLY WITHIN THE ONE CPP FILE
unless they are #included into another file
```

# Headers
- Same header can be included in multiple files
	- Eg. `add.h` included in `add.c` and `add.main`
- `<>` -> we didn't write this header ourselves
- Header guards
```CPP
#ifndef SOME_UNIQUE_NAME_HERE
#define SOME_UNIQUE_NAME_HERE

// your declarations (and certain types of definitions) here

#endif
```
- To prevent multiple definitions due to multiple inclusions


# Variables
Variable assignment and initialisation 
```CPP
int x; //declaration, no initialisation. memory allocated, but random values.

// note: this is different for non built-in types
//eg.
obj a;   // default constructor called, default-initialised. 
obj a{}; // default constructor called, value-initialised.
obj a(); // WRONG!!!! this is taken as function declaration, since no parameter.

int x{};   // value initialisation, set to 0. Used when will be reassigned soon
int x (2); // direct initialisation. Also used for static casting
int x {2}; // direct list initialisation (PREFERRED)
int x = 2; // copy initialisation
```

Benefits of list initialisation
- Narrowing conversions NOT allowed
	- eg. `int w1 {4.5}`  not allowed

Initialisation
- Multiple instantiation allowed, but not multiple initialisation
	- `int a, b;` OK
	- `a, b=5;` not ok

Maybe unused
- C++ 17: `[[maybe_unused]] double pi { 3.1415 }` so compiler doesn't complain if unused

# Streams
- `std::cout << "HELLO!" << "World\n";`
	- Buffered
- `std::cin >> x;`
	- Buffered. Each line in buffer terminated with '\n'
	- Extraction stops at whitespace (space, tab, newline).
	- Extraction rules:
		- eg. int x{}; std::cin >> x;
		- `5a\n` -> 5 extracted, converted to integer, copy assigned to x. `a\n` **left in buffer** for next extraction
		- `b\n` -> failed extraction since not valid integer. **x set to 0**, future extractions fail until input stream is cleared
# Operators
- operator= and oprator<< return their **left operand**
	- eg. x=5 returns x
	- so x=y=5 -> x=(y=5)
		- y=5 assigned 5 to 5, then x=y assigns 5 to x

# Functions
```CPP
int main() {
}
```
- main()
	- Must be int return type
	- Cannot be called explicitly
	- Return value is status code. 0 means normal
- Nested functions not supported
- Function value parameters
	- Passed by value (copied) unless specified to take in a reference
	- Unnamed parameter
		- If we don't use the parameter, do this 
		- `void doSomething(int /*count*/) {}`
- Forward declarations
	- These are what are in header files
	- eg. `int add(int x, int y);`
		- Just declare first, define later on


# Scope and lifetime
- Scope - eg. global vs local scope
	- Determines where variable is accessible within the source code. 
	- Block scope {}: variables only visible inside here
	- Otherwise, standard rules regarding local n global
	- Note that variables within **if-statements** also die after the if-statement ends
	- Return by value returns a temporary object (that holds a copy of the reutn value) to the caller
		- In modern C++ (17), this is further optimised
- Lifetime
	- Duration: rules that govern where a variable is created and destroyed
	- Lifetime: actual time between creation and destruction
	- Runtime concept
	- When does this object occupy a valid memory address? When is it destroyed
	- Automatic (static) lifetime, static lifetime, dynamic (heap) lifetime
	- Objects are destroyed after functions return
	- Named vs temporary objects
		- Named: `int x {5};`
		- Temporary: `int (5);`
		- Named objects are stored in memory until they are destroyed (eg. end of function), but temporary objects are destroyed immediately
			- See [[3. Constants and Strings]], section on `std::string`

Local variables
- Block scope - can be accessed from point of definition to end of block they are defined within
- Automatic duration - created at point of definition, destroyed at end of block they are defined in

Global variables
- Static duration - created when program starts (even before main()), destroyed when ends
	- Note: variables with static duration are **zero-initialised** by default
- Name with prefix, `g_`
- Best to be constant. Avoid non-const global variables

# Namespaces
- Another type of scope region
- Can declare/define names inside it that are isolated from names in other scope
- Can only contain declarations and definitions. Executable statements only allowed as part of a definition (eg. of function)
- Identifiers in global scope are in scope until end of file
- `#include <iostream>` -> import std declarations into global scope
	- std is simply another namespace
```CPP
namespace Name {
	int x;
	void foo(){}
	class Bar {};
}

...
Name::foo();

using namespace Name;
```
- Can have nested namespaces
	- The access with `Foo::Goo::bar()`
```CPP
namespace Foo {
	namespace Goo {
		bar(){}
	}
}

//C++17 way:
namespace Foo:Goo
```
- Namespace aliases
	- `namespace Active = Foo;`

# Variable shadowing
- Try to avoid
- Can have **different** variable in the inner block with same name
	- Use `::` to access global namespace
- Note that C++ resolves names during compile time. Nothing to do with executino flow
```CPP
int x = 10;

int main() {
	std::cout << x << "\n";  // refers to outer x → 10
    int x = 20; // different variable!
    std::cout << x << "\n"; // prints 20 (inner x)
    std::cout << ::x;  // prints 10 (global x)
}
```








