# Vectors
- List constructors
	- Containers have a special consturctor called **list constructor**
	- Can construct instance of container with **initialiser list**
		- Recall: initialiser list used to initialise structs.
	- `std::vector<int> v{1,2,3,4,5};` -> Create vector with those elements
- Constructing vector with specific length
	- `std::vector<int> v(10)` -> vector of length 10
	- Note: list constructor takes precedence when using `{}`
		- So `std::vector<int> v{10}` -> Creates vector with element 10
```cpp
// Copy init
std::vector<int> v1 = 10;     // 10 not an initializer list, copy init won't match explicit constructor: compilation error

// Direct init
std::vector<int> v2(10);      // 10 not an initializer list, matches explicit single-argument constructor

// List init
std::vector<int> v3{ 10 };    // { 10 } interpreted as initializer list, matches list constructor

// Copy list init
std::vector<int> v4 = { 10 }; // { 10 } interpreted as initializer list, matches list constructor
std::vector<int> v5({ 10 });  // { 10 } interpreted as initializer list, matches list constructor

// Default init
std::vector<int> v6 {};       // {} is empty initializer list, matches default constructor
std::vector<int> v7 = {};     // {} is empty initializer list, matches default constructor
```
- Important
	- `{10}` will match with list constructor if it exists, **or single argument constructor if list constructor doesn't exist**
		- For containers, usually have list constructor

> If a type has an initializer_list constructor, and your values are **not** meant to be actual elements, don’t use {} — use ()

- Default member initialisation
```cpp
struct Foo {
    std::vector<int> v1(8); // compile error: direct initialization not allowed for member default initializers
    
    std::vector<int> v{ std::vector<int>(8) }; // ok
};
```

- Arrays contiguous in memory
- Can use CTAD
	- `vector s{1,2,3,4,5};`

## Const vectors
- Must be initialised
- Cannot be modified. Elements inside treated as if they are const.
- Cannot const the elements inside
	- `vector<const int>` not allowed
- Vector cannot be made `constexpr`. If need so, use `std::array`


## Unsigned length and subscript problem
- Length and array subscripts unsigned (problematic)
- Recall that sign conversions are **narrowing**, except when **constexpr**
	- Because compiler can guarantee that the conversion is safe or halt the compilation.
```cpp
constexpr int s{5};
unsigned int u {s}; // ok since s is constexpr and can be converted safely
```

- Length and indices of std::vector have type **size_type**
	- Usually an alias to **std::size_t**
	- **size_t is usually** typedef for some large **unsigned** integral type, usually `unsigned long`
	- When accessing **size_type** member of container class, must scope if with FQN. `std::vector<int>>::size_type`
- Get size with `v.size();`
	- Static cast to store in signed type
	- `int length { static_cast<int>(prime.size()) }; // static_cast return value to int`
	- C++20
		- Use `std::ssize(v)` to return as signed type
- Accessing elements
	- `v[0]` // NO bounds checking. **Undefined behaviour** if out or gane
	- `v.at(0)` // Runtime bounds checking, throws exception.
	- Both of the above can take in non-const index
	- Can index with constexpr (signed int) -> implicit conversion to std::size_t
	- If index with non constexpr signed int, will give warning because narrowing
		- Best way to get around this: use variable of type std::size_t as index.
- Be careful with std::size_t when iterating downwards!
	- eg. `for (std::size_t t = v.size(); t >=0; t--)` -> since size_t is unsigned, it will always be positive! Will carry on infinity and print garbage values
```cpp
int index {3};
v[index]; // this will actually give warning.
```

### Solutions for reverse iteration
- Signed loop variable
	- Safe but requires casting when indexing
	- Can use `std::ptrdiff_t` instead of `int` for large containers
	- C++20: use std::ssize()
```cpp
for (int i = static_cast<int>(vec.size()) - 1; i >= 0; --i) {
    std::cout << vec[static_cast<std::size_t>(i)] << ' ';
}
```

- Unsigned, safe check
	- Decrement after checking i>0
```cpp
for (std::size_t i = vec.size(); i-- > 0;) {
    std::cout << vec[i] << ' ';
}
```
- Reverse iterators
	- No indices needed, cleanest and safest approach
```cpp
for (auto it = vec.rbegin(); it != vec.rend(); ++it) {
    std::cout << *it << ' ';
}
```
- Fake index/subtraction
```cpp
for (std::size_t fake = 0; fake < vec.size(); ++fake) {
    std::size_t real = vec.size() - fake - 1;
    std::cout << vec[real] << ' ';
}
```

KIV: come back to https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/arrays-loops-and-sign-challenge-solutions/#google_vignette
## Passing in vectors
- If want to pass in vector of different types
```cpp
template <typename T>
void passByRef(const std::vector<T>& arr) {
    std::cout << arr[0] << '\n';
}

template <typename T>
void passByRef(const T& arr) { // will accept any type of object that has an overloaded operator[]
    std::cout << arr[0] << '\n';
}

// C++20: can use abbreviated function template (via auto parameter)
void passByRef(const auto& arr) { // abbreviated function template
    std::cout << arr[0] << '\n';
}
```

## Returning vectors, and copy/move semantics
```cpp
std::vector arr1 { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 }; // copies { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 } into arr1
std::vector arr2 { arr1 };          // copies arr1 into arr2

arr1[0] = 6; // We can continue to use arr1
arr2[0] = 7; // and we can continue to use arr2
```

```cpp
std::vector<int> generate(){ // return by value
// We're intentionally using a named object here so mandatory copy elision doesn't apply
    std::vector arr1 { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 }; // copies { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 } into arr1
    return arr1;
}

int main(){
    std::vector arr2 { generate() }; // the return value of generate() dies at the end of the expression

    // There is no way to use the return value of generate() here
    arr2[0] = 7; // we only have access to arr2

```
- Normally, if object is initialised/assigned to object of same type, copy semantics used (assuming copy isn't elided)
	- But when all of the following are true, **move semantics** invoked instead
		- Type support moves semantics
		- Object is initialised/assigned with **rvalue(temporary)** object of same type
		- Move isn't elided

- Can **return** move-capable types (like std::vector and std::string) by **value**
	- Such types will inexpensively **move** their values instead of making an expensive copy.

> For move capable types, we prefer to **pass** by **const reference**, and **return by value** (through moving)

## Loops
- Normal loops, subscripting -> see section previously.
- Range-based loops
	- `for (int num : nums)`
		- Prefer `auto` if want to modify copies of elements
		- Prefer `auto&` if want to modify original elements
		- Prefer `const auto&` otherwise (just need to view)
	- Won't work on C-style arrays
	- Cannot get index this way.
	- Reverse
		- C++ 20: `for (const auto& word : std::views::reverse(words))

## Array indexing, length with ENUMERATORS
```cpp
namespace Students {
    enum Name {
        kenny, // 0
        kyle, // 1
        stan, // 2
        butters, // 3
        cartman, // 4
        max_students // 5
    };
}

int main() {
    std::vector<int> testScores(Students::max_students);
    
    assert(std::size(testScores) == max_students);
    
    testScores[Students::stan] = 76;

    return 0;
}
```
- Vector indexing is with `std::size_t`,  so we need to access (and get length) with types that will implicitly convert to that.
	- Unscope enumerator implicitly **constexpr**,  so conversion is not considered narrowing
	- If put it in a non constexpr variable, then have to cast
		- `Students::Names name {Students::stan}` // name is nonconstexpr
- Alternativley, explicitly specify that underlying type of enum Names is unsigned int
	- `enum Names: unsigned int`
- Good practice to `assert` to ensure length of non-constexpr vector matches count enumerator
	- Note: constexpr not supported for vectors, only for arrays.
			- Hence we use `assert` and not `static_assert`

### What about enum classes?
- Problem: No implicit conversion to integral types
	- Recall: the whole point of enum class was to get rid of the old issues with enum regarding int conversions.
```cpp
enum class StudentNames { // now an enum class
    kenny, // 0
    kyle, // 1
    stan, // 2
    butters, // 3
    cartman, // 4
    max_students // 5
};

int main() {
    // compile error: no conversion from StudentNames to std::size_t
    std::vector<int> testScores(StudentNames::max_students);

    // compile error: no conversion from StudentNames to std::size_t
    testScores[StudentNames::stan] = 76;
}
```

Solutions
- `static_cast` to integer
- Use helper function
- Use unscoped enum

# Vector implementation
```cpp
// Pseudo implementaiton
class Vector {
	T* data;        // pointer to heap array
	size_t size;    // number of elements used
	size_t capacity;// number of elements allocated (including unused)
	
	//...
};
```
- What happens when adding elements?
	- v..push_back() - amortized O(1)
		- If size < capacity - O(1)
			- Construct new element at `data+size`
			- `size` increments
		- Capacity full - O(n)
			- Allocate new larger block, usually 2x capacity
			- Construct new element at the end
			- Destroy old elements
			- Free old memory
			- Update internal pointers

> Take note of resizing! eg.
```cpp
int* p = &v[0];
v.push_back(100); // may reallocate

// p is now INVALID ❌
```

- What happens when removing elements?
	- v.pop_back() - O(1)
		- `size` decreases
		- `capacity` stays same
	- v.erase(v.begin() + 1) - O(n)
		- Elements after the erased one shifted left
		- Last element destroyed
		- `size` decreases
		- `capacity` stays same

## Creating objects
- Also note, for elements added, it doesn't just 'assign memory'
	- It **constructs objects in place**
	- Constructors called, destructors called on removal/allocation
```cpp
new (data + size) T(x); // placement new
```

### `emplace_back` vs `push_back`
- push_back
	- `v.push_back(T(10));`     // creates temporary, then moves/copies
		- `T temp(10);` // temporary object created (usually on stack)
		- `new (data + size) T(std::move(temp));` // then moved/copied into vector
		- Temporary object destroyed
- emplace_back
	- `v.emplace_back(10);`     // constructs directly in-place
		- `new (data + size) T(10);` // direct construction, no temp object at all

- Note: optimisation with `emplace_back` only works for direct construction in argument
	- **Not** if you're trying to push an **existing** object into the vector (still need copy)
	- Also, modern compilers often optimise push_back with copy/move elision

- Emplicit constructors
	- Push_back() won't use explicit constructors, emplace_back() will
```cpp
class Foo{
private:
    std::string m_a{};
  ```cpp
#include <cassert>
#include <iostream>
#include <string_view>
#include <type_traits> // for std::is_integral and std::is_enum
#include <vector>

namespace Items
{
    enum Type: int
    {
        health_potion,
        torch,
        arrow,
        max_items
    };
}

std::string_view getItemNamePlural(Items::Type type)
{
    switch (type)
    {
        case Items::health_potion:  return "health potions";
        case Items::torch:          return "torches";
        case Items::arrow:          return "arrows";

        default:                    return "???";
    }
}

std::string_view getItemNameSingular(Items::Type type)
{
    switch (type)
    {
        case Items::health_potion:  return "health potion";
        case Items::torch:          return "torch";
        case Items::arrow:          return "arrow";

        default:                    return "???";
    }
}

// Helper function to convert `value` into an object of type std::size_t
// UZ is the suffix for literals of type std::size_t.
template <typename T>
constexpr std::size_t toUZ(T value)
{
    // make sure T is an integral type
    static_assert(std::is_integral<T>() || std::is_enum<T>());

    return static_cast<std::size_t>(value);
}


void printInventoryItem(const std::vector<int>& inventory, Items::Type type)
{
    bool plural { inventory[toUZ(type)] != 1 };
    std::cout << "You have " << inventory[toUZ(type)] << ' ';
    std::cout << (plural ? getItemNamePlural(type) : getItemNameSingular(type)) << '\n';
}

// Inventory items should have integral quantities, so we don't need a function template here
int countTotalItems(const std::vector<int>& inventory)
{
    int sum { 0 };
    for (auto e: inventory)
        sum += e;
    return sum;
}

int main()
{
    std::vector inventory { 1, 5, 10 };
    assert(std::size(inventory) == Items::max_items); // make sure our inventory has the correct number of initializers

    // Since we can't iterate over an enumerated type using a ranged-for, we'll need to use a traditional for-loop here
    for (int i=0; i < Items::max_items; ++i)
    {
        auto item { static_cast<Items::Type>(i) };
        printInventoryItem(inventory, item);
    }

    std::cout << "You have " << countTotalItems(inventory) << " total items\n";

    return 0;
}
```  int m_b{};

public:
    Foo(std::string_view a, int b)
        : m_a { a }, m_b { b }
        {}

    explicit Foo(int b)
        : m_a {}, m_b { b }
        {};
};

// push_back won't use explicit constructors, emplace_back will
stack.push_back({ 2 }); // compile error: Foo(int) is explicit
stack.emplace_back(2);  // ok
```
## Resizing vector
- `v.resize(5);`
	- Note: new elements are value-initialised (default-initialisation for class types, zero-initialiastion for other types)
	- Reallocation is expensive, because every element in array is copied to new memory.
	- Note: changes **both length and capacity!** ie. adds new elements.
		- If we don't want to change length, use `reserve()`
- `v.capacity()`
	- How much memory is allocated
- `v.size()`
	- How much memory is actually used
	- Vector indexing validity is based on this.
- `v.shrink_to_fit();`
	- Requests that vector shrink its capacity to match its lengthcapactiy.
	- Request is **non-binding**, so implementation is free to ignore it.

> Use **resize()** when accessing a vector via **indexing**, this **changes the length** of vector so indices valid
> Use **reserve()** when accessing vector with **stack** operations. Adds **capacity** without changing length
## Stack behaviour with vector
- `push_back()`, `pop_back()` and `back()`
	- But resize each time we push and pop?
	- **Note: pop_back() and back() on empty vector is undefined!**
- We want a way to set capacity (to avoid future allocations) without changing the length 
	- Can't use vector resizing. eg.
	- `std::vector<int> stack(3);` 
		- Parenthesis initialisation to set size of vector, and `resize()`function set both capacity and length
		- ie. this vector will start with 3 elements of 0, and then continue to resize on top of that when pushing and popping.
Solution
- Use `v.reserve(6)`
	- Changes capacity but not length
# `std::vector<bool>
- Come back to this! KIV

> Not advised to use!