
# Composition
- Member-class
	- Member is part of Class
	- Member can only belong to one class at a time
	- Member has its existence managed by the class
	- Member does not know about existence of class

- Implementation
- Data member as part of struct/class
- Rule of thumb
- Each class should be built to accomplish a single task
- Task: either storage and manipulation of some kind of data, OR the coordination of its members. Ideally not both

Aggregation
- Member-class
	- Member is part of Class
	- Member can belong to multiple class at a time
	- Member does not have its existence managed by the class
	- Member does not know about existence of class

- Implementation
	- Data member pointer/reference to another object
	- Thus when the encompassing class object gets destroyed, the reference/pointer destroyed but not deleted so the object contained still exists

  

## Reference wrapper
- How to store references? Cannot store references in vector.

```cpp
std::vector<std::reference_wrapper<const std::string>> names {...};
```

- Todo: take notes on this.

  
# Aggregation
- Uses-a relationship
	- 2 objects otherwise unrelated
	- Object can belong to more than one object at a time
	- Object does not have its existence managed by object
	- Object may or may not know about existence of object


- Remember that if classes have circle dependency, need to forward declare    

|                                        |                |                |                                 |
| -------------------------------------- | -------------- | -------------- | ------------------------------- |
| Property                               | Composition    | Aggregation    | Association                     |
| Relationship type                      | Whole/part     | Whole/part     | Otherwise unrelated             |
| Members can belong to multiple classes | No             | Yes            | Yes                             |
| Members’ existence managed by class    | Yes            | No             | No                              |
| Directionality                         | Unidirectional | Unidirectional | Unidirectional or bidirectional |
| Relationship verb                      | Part-of        | Has-a          | Uses-a                          |

# Associations
- One object invokes another object’s functionality to accomplish a task

  

## Initialiser list
- (notes)

  
# Inheritance 
- ‘Is-a’ relationship
	- Derived class acquires the **member function**s and **variables** from parent class.
```cpp
// SoccerPlayer publicly inheriting Person
class SoccerPlayer : public Person 
{
};
```
- Order of construction
	- Memory allocated (enough for all portions)
	- Base default constructor called to construct the base object first
	- Then each child class constructed in order, using Derived default constructor etc.
- How to initialise members of the parent class?
	- Cannot do this in the member initialiser list of the derived class' constructor
	- **Member variable can only be set in the member initialiser list of a constructor belonging to SAME CLASS as the variable**
		- Because of const and reference variables
	- We can add a **call to the Base class constructor** in the member initialiser list of the derived class
		- To **choose** which Base class constructor is called
	- It does not matter where in the Derived constructor member initiliser list the Base constructor is called, it will **always execute first**
	- Note that constructors can only call constructors from their **immediate** parent/base class.

- Order of destruction
	- **Reverse** order of construction (base class destroyed last)
```cpp
// Derived constructor
Derived(double cost=0.0, int id=0)
        : Base{ id } // Call Base(int) constructor with value id!
        , m_cost{ cost }
    {
    }
```

## Access control rules
- Private members **cannot** be accessed by derived class!
	- Need to use access functions.